FILE: cm002310v11.0.txt
DYAD: USA - HUNGARY
RIVALRY: RIV10063
DISPUTE(S): MID258 MID3712 
RIVALRY: RIV10064
DISPUTE(S): MID1286 

PSNOTES: 
PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20170714
PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20170730

Territorial-Maritime-Boundary Issues Variables

WWII MIDs: MID258 MID3712 

MID1286 

TERRMID: MID1286 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID1286 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: MID1286 from cm narrative, this is a multilateral MID pitting US and Yugoslavia against USSR, Bulgaria, Hungary, and Romania. The tensions that led to this MID began when Yugoslavia and the USSR began to drift apart in terms of the ruling Yugoslavia Communist Party's willingness to acquiesce to Stalin's directives. The US observed the drift and tried to create an anti-Soviet state in the region by providing economic, food, and military assistance to Yugoslavia, and even attempted to bring Yugoslavia into NATO. Soviet troop mobilizations and border clashes occurred between Yugoslavia and Soviet-bloc states — Hungary, Bulgaria, and Romania. The US and USSR are also included in this MID since they were rivals providing military assistance and/or orders and the tension was tied to their rivalry. The US considered the USSR's and its allies' behavior threatening during this MID, and the USSR found the US's intervention threatening. Coded not territorial because the US and Hungary did not dispute any territory between them. 

TERRLINK: MID1286 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID1286 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID1286 coded not third party link to territory because this was not a territorial MID between USSR and Yugoslavia. The USSR was attempting to replace the government of Yugoslavia with a more friendly communist government, but the USSR was not making a territorial claim on Yugoslavia. This was a political leadership dispute between Yugoslavia and the USSR that involved the US and several Soviet bloc states. 

MARITMID: MID1286 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID1286 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID1286 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID1286 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID1286 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID1286 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID1286 from cm narrative, Stalin attempted to create domestic unrest that would result in an overthrow of the communist government in Yugoslavia and the replacement by a more USSR-friendly communist government. However, the domestic unrest did not result in violence or a militarized rebel group during this MID. Coded not civil war because no militarized anti-government group was present. 

CIVWARLINK: MID1286 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID1286 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID1286 coded not civil war link because although Stalin was attempting to foment domestic unrest in Yugoslavia, no militarized rebel group formed in this MID, and there are therefore no third party links to civil war in this multilateral dispute. 

COUPMID: MID1286 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID1286 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID1286 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID1286 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

 

RIVNOTES: MID1286 involves Yugoslavia and the Cold War while MID258 and MID3712 are World War~II related. Hence, we create two separate rivalries.

NARRATIVE-CM:
Hungary declared its independence from the Austrian-Hungarian Empire on October 17, 1918. President Franklin Roosevelt ordered the freezing of Hungarian assets in United States banks on April 10, 1940. Hungary declared war against the US on December 12, 1941, and the US declared war against Hungary on June 5, 1942. Hunagary and the Allied countries signed a ceasefire agreement in Moscow on January 20, 1945. Hungary and the US signed a peace treaty on September 15, 1947, which required Hungary to settle outstanding claims by US citizens against the Hungarian government. Soviet military aircraft forced a US C-47 plane to land in Hungary on November 19, 1951. Hungary released the crew of the US C-47 after paying $120,000 in fines on December 28, 1951. The US submitted the case to the *International Court of Justice *(ICJ) on March 3, 1954, but Hungary rejected ICJ jurisdiction over the case. Hungary and the US signed a claims agreement in Washington DC on March 6, 1973.

SOURCES-CM: 
Butterworth, 1976, 159; Ference, 1994, 213-253; Jessup, 1998, 290-292; Langer, 1972, 1205-1207; Lillich, 1975, 534-559.

NARRATIVE-CR:
The rivalry between the United States and Hungary is one that is not of the same order as the rivalry between the United States and the USSR. Instead it takes on the character of a rivalry by association. In other words, Hungary becomes an opponent not because of direct opposition to the United States over a specific issue of dispute between the two countries. Rather the two become rivals because they are members of opposing alliances. This is complicated by the fact that Hungary is a second order power in both of the alliances that are opposed the United States. Hungary was aligned with the Axis powers in World War II, and the first two mids in the rivalry take place during WWII. After the war, the Hungarians come under the control of the Soviet sphere of influence and as such are aligned against the United States. The third mid references the Soviet-Yugoslav mid and thus the US and Hungary are secondary actors here as well. Therefore, while the two countries do engage in three mids, only one of the mids involves direct reference between the two countries. That is MID3712. In MID3712, Hungary makes a threat towards the US regarding the Lend Lease Act. 

MID3712 is related to World War II. Hungary made a thinly veiled threat to the United States regarding the Lend Lease Act. The Hungarians correctly viewed this as a shift in position from neutrality to support of the allied powers. The Lend Lease Act was an arrangement for the transfer of war supplies, including food, machinery, and services, to nations whose defense was considered vital to the defense of the United States in World War II. The Lend-Lease Act, passed (1941) by the U.S. Congress, gave the President power to sell, transfer, lend, or lease such war materials. The Hungarians made this threat on 13 March 1941. 

MID258 is World War II. In the War, Hungary fought on the side of Germany and the Axis powers. It declared war on the USSR in June of 1941 and on the United States in December of 1941. When the Hungarian government took steps to withdraw from the war and protect its Jewish population, German troops occupied the country in March of 1944. The Germans were driven out by Soviet forces in October of 1944-April of 1945. 

MID1286 occurred from August of 1949 through November of 1951. This mid is titled `Yugoslavia vs. Cominform countries.' It is covers the rift in relations between the USSR and Yugoslavia. It pits Yugoslavia and the US v. the USSR, Bulgaria, Hungary, and Romania. The central combatants here were the USSR and Yugoslavia. This event is also described as the Yugoslav - Soviet Rift. In this mid Stalin feared that he was losing his grip on Eastern Europe and in 1947 ordered creation of a Soviet-dominated socialist bloc. In 1947, the Soviet, East European, Italian, and French communist parties founded the Cominform (Communist Information Bureau). Stalin saw the independent Communists in Yugoslavia as a direct threat. There were other precursors to antagonism including Stalin's wartime objections to Yugoslavian Communist political initiative, his refusal to provide aid to the Communist movement in Yugoslavia, and Red Army looting and raping in Yugoslavia in 1944 and 1945. There were also issues regarding Yugoslavia resistance to participation in Soviet economic schemes that would have had a one way beneficiary relationship towards Moscow. After a series of escalatory steps the Cominform expelled Yugoslavia and called on Yugoslav communists to overthrow Tito. At first the Yugoslav communists and Tito responded in a conciliatory fashion. Yugoslavs supported Soviet foreign policy and implemented Stalinist economic measures. However, collectivization proved disastrous as agricultural output decreased and coercive tactics used by the regime eroded support for the government. Yugoslav relations with the West in 1949 were also in a poor state as there were lingering issues with Italy over Trieste and issues with various countries over nationalized property within Yugoslavia. The Soviet-bloc governments launched an economic blockade against Yugoslavia, excluding it from the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CEMA). The Soviets propagandized harshly against "Judas" Tito in Serbo-Croatian broadcasts, attempted to subvert Yugoslav party organizations, and sought to incite unrest among the Hungarian, Albanian, and Russian minorities in Yugoslavia. Troop movements and border incidents convinced Yugoslav leaders that a Soviet-bloc invasion was imminent, requiring fundamental changes in foreign policy. In July 1949, Tito closed the Yugoslav-Greek border and ceased supplying the pro-Cominform Greek communists, and in August Yugoslav votes in the United Nations began to stray from the Soviet line. Welcoming the Yugoslav-Soviet rift, the West commenced a flow of economic aid in 1949, saved the country from hunger in 1950, and covered much of Yugoslavia's trade deficit for the next decade. The United States began shipping weapons to Yugoslavia in 1951. A military security arrangement was concluded in 1953, but the Western powers were unable to bring Yugoslavia into the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). During the mid their were minor skirmishes on the border and a US cargo aircraft carrying supplies to Yugoslavia was forced to land in Hungary but subsequently allowed to proceed. 

Issues that may be associated with the end of mids between the US and Hungary include Stalin's death in 1953 and a subsequent change in leadership in Hungary three times in three years. The new Soviet leadership permitted a more flexible policy in Eastern Europe known as the New Course. Rakoski (the Hungarian Prime Minister) and other party leaders were summoned to Moscow, where Soviet leaders harshly criticized them for Hungary's dismal economic performance. Rakosi retained his position as party chief, but the Soviet leaders forced the appointment of Nagy as prime minister. Nagy ended the purges and began freeing political prisoners. In his first address to the National Assembly as prime minister, Nagy attacked Rakosi for his use of terror, and the speech was printed in the party newspaper. 

Nagy and Hungary ceased collectivization of agriculture, allowed peasants to leave the collective farms, canceled the collective farms' compulsory production quotas, and raised government prices for deliveries. However, Nagy failed to fundamentally alter the planning system and neglected to introduce incentives to replace compulsory plan targets, resulting in a poorer record of plan fulfillment after 1953 than before. Rakosi used his influence to disrupt Nagy's reforms and erode his political position. In 1954 Soviet leaders who favored economic policies akin to Nagy's lost a Kremlin power struggle. Rakosi seized the opportunity to attack Nagy as a right-wing deviationist and to criticize shortcomings in the economy. Nagy was forced to resign from the government in April 1955 and was later expelled from the Politburo, Central Committee, and finally the party itself. Thus, the Central Committee that had lauded the New Course in June 1953 unanimously condemned its architect less than two years later. 

Similarly there was a leadership change in the United States in 1953, when Eisenhower was elected. Eisenhower encouraged the development of more independent regimes in Eastern Europe through trade and cultural relations policies. Under President Lyndon Johnson these policies were accelerated. 

The United States had attempted to encourage the development of more independent regimes in Eastern Europe through its trade and cultural relations policies since the Eisenhower administration. Under President Lyndon B. Johnson (1963 - 1969), an even greater emphasis was given to trade policy as a tool to encourage the breakup of the Soviet empire. Johnson launched the bridge building policy that was designed to improve relations with the Communist Bloc states while while simultaneously encouraging them to loosen their ties with the Soviet Union.

U.S. relations with Hungary moved toward normalization during the Johnson administration. Full diplomatic relations, interrupted during the 1956 revolution, were restored and the two states raised their representation from legations to embassies. Hungary also ended jamming of Voice of America broadcasts. However, the status of Cardinal Mindszenty remained unresolved and the Hungarian Government supported violent anti-American demonstrations. The defections of three Hungarian diplomats further complicated the relationship. The Czech crisis also had a deleterious effect on U.S.-Hungarian relations. The Kadar regime supported Soviet actions, contributing troops to the Warsaw Pact invasion force. Hungarian actions revealed the extent to which that state remained a satellite of the Soviet Union. 

SOURCES-CR:
Burant, 1989; New York Times, 3/13/1941; United States Department of State; Foreign Relations of the United States 1964-1968, Volume XVII Eastern Europe
