FILE: cm002345v11.0.txt
DYAD: USA-YUGOSLAVIA/SERBIA
RIVALRY: RIV69
DISPUTE(S): MID3193 
RIVALRY: RIV70
DISPUTE(S): MID3551 MID4046 MID4137 MID4186 MID4343 MID4298 

PS: 19009999-19920522 0.5 19920523-20010119 0.00 20010120-20209999 0.5

PS-UPDATE2020:

PSNOTES: 

PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20220208
PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20220208

Territorial-Maritime-Boundary Issues Variables

MID3193 

TERRMID: MID3193 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID3193 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: MID3193 from cm narrative, this MID occurred August 1946. Yugoslavia shot down a US transport plane in Yugoslavian airspace. The US issued an ultimatum for Yugoslavia to release the captured personnel, which they complied with. Coded not territorial because the US and Yugoslavia had no disputed territory.

TERRLINK: MID3193 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID3193 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID3193 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID3193 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID3193 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID3193 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID3193 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID3193 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID3193 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID3193 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID3193 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID3193 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID3193 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID3193 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID3551 

TERRMID: MID3551 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID3551 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID3551 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID3551 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID3551 from cm narrative, Serbia's President Milosevic did not want Yugoslavia to break up into independent republics and attacked Croatia and Bosnia to prevent this. Serbia was not claiming the Yugoslavian states' territory as under its own sovereignty, but did dispute their international boundaries in the sense that Serbia thought the Yugoslavian states should not have their own boundaries independent of a Yugoslavian state. Coded third party link to territorial MID because the US became involved in this MID, which is territorial, civil war, and civil war link. See CIVWARMID and CIVWARLINK. 

MARITMID: MID3551 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID3551 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID3551 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID3551 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID3551 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID3551 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID3551 from cm narrative, MID3551 covers the break up of the former Yugoslavia and the fighting in the three former republics of Yugoslavia, Slovenia, Croatia, and Bosnia-Herzegovina. These were civil wars in which the UN and NATO intervened. Slovenia, Croatia, Macedonia, Montenegro, and Bosnia-Herzegovina all elected non-communist and nationalist/independence parties in their elections and began to make preparations for secession from Yugoslavia. President Milosevic of Serbia would not allow a breakup of Yugoslavia. Milosevic and other Serb leaders sent guerrillas into Serb-majority districts in Croatia, armed the villagers, and the newly armed villagers violently invaded non-Serb majority districts and occupied them. Eventually, Croatian militias began fighting to retake the districts. The US was pulled into this MID when they reversed their policy of supporting a united Yugoslavia and denounced Serbia as the aggressors and imposed economic sanctions. Coded civil war MID because civil war within Yugoslavia eventually convinced the US and other NATO and UN states to intervene and put a stop to ethnic cleansing in Bosnia. The US, UK, France, Germany, Greece, Turkey, Spain, Netherlands, and Italy all took part in shows of force, a blockade, and/or a no fly zone over Yugoslavia, pulling them all into this MID against Yugoslavia. 

CIVWARLINK: MID3551 1 -- civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID3551 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID3551 from cm narrative, this civil war MID appears in many dyads, as it is a multilateral MID involving Yugoslavia vs. all the UN/NATO countries who imposed sanctions, a blockade, a no fly zone, or shows of force against Yugoslavia in order to stop the ethnic cleansing, international war, and civil war incitement by Serbia. The UN/NATO countries include US, UK, France, Germany, Greece, Turkey, Spain, Netherlands, and Italy.

COUPMID: MID3551 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID3551 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID3551 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID3551 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID4046 

TERRMID: MID4046 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID4046 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID4046 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID4046 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID4046 from cm narrative, this MID was triggered by UN/NATO forces participating in UNPROFOR operations during the Yugoslavian wars. UN/NATO forces were providing security in Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Macedonia. UN/NATO troops bombed Serbia on several occasions in this MID. Coded third party link to territorial MID because the Yugoslavian Wars were partly territorial in nature, as Serbia did not want other states to became independent and was fighting to keep them within Yugoslavia. The US was involved in this territorial dispute as part of UN/NATO forces. 

MARITMID: MID4046 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID4046 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID4046 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4046 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4046 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4046 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID4046 this MID is both territorial and civil war in nature. From cm narrative, UN/NATO forces were intervening, attempting to stop the political violence in Yugoslavia and the former republics. In this MID, UN/NATO forces bombed Serbia on several occasions. This MID is partly civil war in nature because villagers throughout Yugoslavia had been armed along ethnic lines, giving rise to several ethnic insurgencies throughout the Yugoslavian Wars. Coded civil war MID because the US was brought into this MID partially because of militarized insurgencies in Serbia. 

CIVWARLINK: MID4046 1 -- civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4046 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID4046 this MID is both territorial and civil war in nature. From cm narrative, UN/NATO forces were intervening, attempting to stop the political violence in Yugoslavia and the former republics. In this MID, UN/NATO forces bombed Serbia on several occasions. This MID is partly civil war in nature because villagers throughout Yugoslavia had been armed along ethnic lines, giving rise to several ethnic insurgencies throughout the Yugoslavian Wars. Coded civil war link because the US was brought into this MID partially because of militarized insurgencies in other republics within the Yugoslavian Wars. 

COUPMID: MID4046 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4046 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4046 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4046 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID4137 

TERRMID: MID4137 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: MID4137 The US and Serbia did not dispute territory between themselves.

TERRLINK: MID4137 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID4137 from cm narrative, this is the Kosovo conflict, February 1998-June 1999. Fighting erupted in Kosovo between ethnic Albanians and Serbs, and Serbian President Milosevic sent troops to fight inside Kosovo. UN/NATO militarily intervened to stop the violence, triggering their involvement in this MID. Coded third party link to territory because Kosovo had declared independence, but Serbia did not recognize them and declared Kosovo as part of its territory in the interest of "protecting" the ethnic Serbs there. 

MARITMID: MID4137 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID4137 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4137 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: 4137 from cm narrative, part of the Yugoslavia-Albania conflict involved ethnic Albanians waging an insurgency inside Yugoslavia, which in turn contributed to border fortifications. Coded civil war MID because an insurgency was taking place in Yugoslavia (inside this dyad) and contributed to this MID. 

CIVWARLINK: MID4137 1 -- civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID4137 from cm narrative, part of the Kosovo conflict involved fighting between ethnic Albanian and Serbian civilians. Insurgencies formed along ethnic lines and took part in the fighting. Coded civil war link because this civil war activity was connected to the UN/NATO involvement in Kosovo, bringing the US into this MID, and ethnic Serbians were also fighting inside Albania here. 

COUPMID: MID4137 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4137 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID4186 

TERRMID: MID4186 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID4186 1 -- third party link to territorial MID 
TERRLINK-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID4186 from cm narrative, this is one of two MIDs connected to Yugoslavia's withdrawal from Kosovo and the lingering hostilities between Yugoslavia and UN/NATO forces. Clashes occurred as Milosevic was attempting to hold onto power in Serbia. Coded third party link to territory because Kosovo was partially territorial in nature, as Yugoslavia did not recognize its independence and claimed its territory as its own due to ethnic Serbs. UN/NATO countries' military intervention in Kosovo pulls them into this MID. 

MARITMID: MID4186 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID4186 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4186 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID4186 from cm narrative, this MID is connected to Yugoslavia's withdrawal from Kosovo. The withdrawal involved clashes between Yugoslavia and other countries, and some clashes involved Yugoslavia and Albania against ethnic insurgencies in those countries. Ethnic Serbs were fighting in Albania, and ethnic Albanians were fighting in Yugoslavia, contributing to this MID. Coded civil war MID because this MID involved an ethnic Albanian insurgency in Yugoslavia, outside of this dyad. 

CIVWARLINK: MID4186 1 -- civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID4186 from cm narrative, this is one of two MIDs connected to Yugoslavia's withdrawal from Kosovo and the lingering hostilities between Yugoslavia and UN/NATO forces. Clashes occurred as Milosevic attempted to hold onto power in Serbia. Coded civil war link because civil war activity in Kosovo, outside of this dyad, contributed to the violence. Ethnic Serbs and ethnic Albanians fought throughout the conflict. UN/NATO military intervention pulls them into this MID.

COUPMID: MID4186 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4186 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID4343 

TERRMID: MID4343 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID4343 1 -- third party link to territorial MID 
TERRLINK-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID4343 from cm narrative, this is one of two MIDs connected to Yugoslavia's withdrawal from Kosovo and the lingering hostilities between Yugoslavia and UN/NATO forces. Clashes occurred as Milosevic was attempting to hold onto power in Serbia. Coded third party link to territory because Kosovo was partially territorial in nature, as Yugoslavia did not recognize its independence and claimed its territory as its own due to ethnic Serbs. UN/NATO countries' military intervention in Kosovo pulls them into this MID. 

MARITMID: MID4343 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID4343 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4343 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID4343 from cm narrative, this MID is connected to Yugoslavia's withdrawal from Kosovo. The withdrawal involved clashes between Yugoslavia and other countries, and some clashes involved Yugoslavia and Albania against ethnic insurgencies in those countries. Ethnic Serbs were fighting in Albania, and ethnic Albanians were fighting in Yugoslavia. contributing to this MID. Coded civil war MID because this MID involved an ethnic Albanian insurgency in Yugoslavia, outside of this dyad. 

CIVWARLINK: MID4343 1 -- civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID4343 from cm narrative, this is one of two MIDs connected to Yugoslavia's withdrawal from Kosovo and the lingering hostilities between Yugoslavia and UN/NATO forces. Clashes occurred as Milosevic attempted to hold onto power in Serbia. Coded civil war link because civil war activity in Kosovo, outside of this dyad, contributed to the violence. Ethnic Serbs and ethnic Albanians fought throughout the conflict. UN/NATO military intervention pulls them into this MID.

COUPMID: MID4343 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4343 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID4298 

TERRMID: MID4298 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID4298 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID4298 3 -- not third party link to territory
TERRLINK-CER: MID4298 2 -- somewhat certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID4298 from cm narrative, this MID occurred several years after the war between Yugoslavia and Croatia ended. Yugoslavia seized a Croatian freighter and released it two days later. The US joined Croatia in naval military exercises two days later, 9/26/2000 to 9/29/2000. Coded not third party link because Yugoslavia and Croatia were no longer disputing the border. Coded somewhat certain because it is possible that this was connected to Yugoslavia fighting other former Yugoslavian republics at that time, but this is unclear. 

MARITMID: MID4298 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID4298 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID4298 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4298 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4298 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4298 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARLINK: MID4298 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4298 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID4298 previous MIDs in this dyad are civil war link, as many are connected to ongoing ethnic insurgencies in Yugoslavia and UN/NATO interventions into the conflicts. However, this MID is not connected to civil violence and involves Yugoslavia seizing a Croatia freighter, and the joint US-Croatia response. 

COUPMID: MID4298 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4298 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4298 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4298 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID3 1993-2001:

MID3551
rivalry=2345 nationa=USA nationb=YUGOSLAVIA-SERBIA MID3551 19920716 -19961002 revtype1a=POLICY revtype2a=. fatala=NONE fatalpa=0 lhosta=USE OF FORCE revtype1b=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2b=. fatalb=NONE fatalpb=0 lhostb=USE OF FORCE 

In response to Yugoslav involvement in Bosnian civil war, Western countries first showed force and then began a blockade against Yugoslavia. On 7/16/1992 there was a show of force by USA, UK, France, Germany, Greece, Turkey, Spain and Italy. The blockaded against Yugoslavia commences on 11/22/1992 with Belgium joining the states mentioned above. Netherlands joins the MIDdue to its assistance to the US and France by enforcing a No-Fly zone over Yugoslavia on 4/12/1339. End date is the end date of the Blockade. First day of dispute is on 7/16/1992 and last day of dispute was on 10/2/1996.

MID4046
rivalry=2345 nationa=YUGOSLAVIA-SERBIA nationb=USA MID4046 19940423 -19940505 revtype1a=TERRITORY revtype2a=NOT APPLICABLE fatala=NONE fatalpa=0 lhosta=DISPLAY OF FORCE revtype1b=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2b=NOT APPLICABLE fatalb=NONE fatalpb=0
lhostb=DISPLAY OF FORCE 

Yugoslavia (Serbia) has a territorial dispute with Macedonia. When Macedonia declared independence in 1991, it defined its borders as those delineated by Yugoslavia when Macedonia was a Yugoslav republic. Yugoslavia has claimed that the true border is further south and that a section of Macedonia's territory really belongs to Yugoslavia. There were numerous incidents on the border between Yugoslavia and Macedonia, some of them involving US troops that were sent there as peacekeepers. First day of dispute was on 4/23/1994 and last day of dispute was on 5/5/1994.

MID4137
rivalry=2345 nationa=USA nationb=YUGOSLAVIA-SERBIA MID4137 19980503 -19990610 revtype1a=POLICY revtype2a=NOT APPLICABLE fatala=NONE fatalpa=0 lhosta=USE OF FORCE revtype1b=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2b=NOT APPLICABLE fatalb=501-999 DEATHS fatalpb=
. lhostb=USE OF FORCE 

In response to Yugoslav military activity in the bordering Kosovo region, Albania, followed by other nations, took military action against Yugoslavia. Albania began by fortifying its border with Yugoslavia, and engaged in numerous subsequent incidents with Yugoslavia over its stance toward ethnic Albanians in Kosovo. Beginning in mid-1998, NATO states began conducting military exercises and other shows of force and began to threaten Yugoslavia with airstrikes if it did not change its Kosovo policy. Yugoslavia responded with mobilizations and other militarized actions. From 3/24/99, NATO countries began carrying out airstrikes against Yugoslavia, which acceded to NATO demands to leave Kosovo in early June 1999. NATO bombings ceased on 6/10/99. First day of dispute was on 5/3/1998 and last day of dispute was on 6/10/1999.

MID4186
rivalry=2345 nationa=USA nationb=YUGOSLAVIA-SERBIA MID4186 20000221 -20000403 revtype1a=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2a=NOT APPLICABLE fatala=NONE fatalpa=0 lhosta=DISPLAY OF FORCE revtype1b=POLICY revtype2b=NOT APPLICABLE fatalb=NONE fatalpb=0
lhostb=DISPLAY OF FORCE 

This dispute deals with the relationship between NATO and Yugoslavia. At this time KFOR was patrolling the border between Kosovo and Yugoslavia, but a number of rebels from Kosovo were continuing to infiltrate into Yugoslavia and attack Serb police officers. Yugoslavia originally moved forces to the border to counter the actions by the Kosovars and this was met with a NATO threat. First day of dispute was on 2/21/2000 and last day of dispute was on 4/3/2000.

MID4298
rivalry=2345 nationa=YUGOSLAVIA-SERBIA nationb=USA MID4298 20000926 -20000929 revtype1a=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2a=NOT APPLICABLE fatala=NONE fatalpa=0 lhosta=USE OF FORCE revtype1b=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2b=NOT APPLICABLE fatalb=NONE fatalpb=0
lhostb=DISPLAY OF FORCE 

Yugoslavia seized a Croatian freighter, the "Dea," which was released 2 days later. Shortly after this incident, the USA and Croatia conduct a joint naval exercise. The USA claims that the timing was a coincident, but acknowledged that it had been delayed and rescheduled at Croatian request. First day of dispute was on 9/26/2000 and last day of dispute was on 9/29/2000.

MID4343
rivalry=2345 nationa=YUGOSLAVIA-SERBIA nationb=USA MID4343 20001124 -20001128 revtype1a=POLICY revtype2a=NOT APPLICABLE fatala=NONE fatalpa=0 lhosta=DISPLAY OF FORCE revtype1b=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2b=NOT APPLICABLE fatalb=NONE fatalpb=0
lhostb=NO MILITARIZED ACTION 

First day of dispute was on 11/24/2000 and last day of dispute was on 11/28/2000. NO COW MID NARRATIVE AVAILABLE.

RIVNOTES: 
RIV70-MID4186, this MID has been broken up into two MID4186 & MID4343 because the incidents were more than 6 months apart.

NARRATIVE-CM:
A United States C-47 transport plane was shot down by Yugoslav fighter planes over Slovenia on August 9, 1946. The crew of the transport plane-which consisted of seven US personnel, two Hungarian personnel, and one Turkish personnel-was captured and detained by Yugoslav troops. The US issued an ultimatum to the Yugoslav government on August 21, 1946, which demanded the release of the crew within 48 hours. Yugoslavia complied with the ultimatum on August 22, 1946. US military forces participated in a *North Atlantic Treaty Organization* (NATO) bombing campaign against Yugoslavia (Serbia) from March 24 to June 10, 1999.

SOURCES-CM: 
*Keesing,* August 24-31, 1946.

NARRATIVE-CR:
The rivalry between the US and Yugoslavia stems from the US role in NATO and UN operations to help bring an end to the various conflicts that took place in the former Yugoslavia. The United States imposed a series of diplomatic sanctions on Serbia on May 23, 1992, and denounced the death and destruction in the former Yugoslav republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina and detention of civilians there as a "humanitarian nightmare." The new measures, which represent a policy reversal by Washington, include breaking U.S. military contacts with the Serb-led Yugoslav government, closing Yugoslav consulates in New York and San Francisco, and reducing the U.S. Embassy staff in Belgrade. Secretary of State James A. Baker III announced the steps at 10 Downing St. after a dinner meeting with British Prime Minister John Major and Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd. Later Baker announced that Washington also has decided not to recognize Serbia and Montenegro-the only two Yugoslav republics not to seek independence-as the legal successors to the disintegrating country until all of the Serb-led forces are withdrawn from neighboring states and minority rights are respected. Until a few days ago, Washington encouraged European nations to take the lead in addressing the violence, which is close at hand for the nations of the continent. Earlier this week, however, Washington acted first in revoking the landing rights in the United States of the Yugoslav airline JAT, and later it went ahead of the Europeans with the new list of measures, which were made known in advance to members of the European Community through diplomatic notes sent to their capitals. The greater activism on the part of the U.S. administration appeared to reflect frustration that the European Community has been divided on and relatively inactive in dealing with the violence. It also appeared to be a response to increasing criticism in the United States about the passivity of U.S. policy.

The first mid that occurs-in 1946-is not related to those that occur in the 1990s. In this first mid the Yugoslavs shot down a US transport plane flying in Yugoslav airspace. All other mids are related to efforts by a large coalition of nations to end fighting in Croatia, Bosnia-Herzogovina, and Kosovo. On several occasions there are direct confrontations between US and Yugoslav forces. The most notable confrontation occurs in the Kosovo War-a 78 day event that took place in 1999-in which US war planes attacked Serb positions in Serbia and Kosovo in an attempt to stop the fighting in that province. 

MID3193 occurred in August of 1946. A United States C-47 transport plane was shot down by Yugoslav fighter planes over Slovenia on August 9, 1946. The crew of the transport plane-which consisted of seven US personnel, two Hungarian personnel, and one Turkish personnel-was captured and detained by Yugoslav troops. The US issued an ultimatum to the Yugoslav government on August 21, 1946, which demanded the release of the crew within 48 hours. Yugoslavia complied with the ultimatum on August 22, 1946. This mid is not related in any way to the subsequent mids between the two countries that took place in the 1990s. 

In the 1990s, ethnic problems and attempts by the Yugoslav People's Army (Jugoslavenska Narodna Armija, JNA) to prevent secession of the newly-formed states led to a bloody and gruesome war from 1991 to 1995 in Croatia and Bosnia. As a result of the conflict, the United Nations Security Council unanimously adopted UN Security Council Resolution 721 on November 27, 1991, which paved the way to the establishment of peacekeeping operations in Yugoslavia. Milosevic's regime manipulated the Serbs in an attempt to subdue the breakaway republics, successfully at first but ultimately failing. The war in the western parts of former Yugoslavia ended in 1995 with U.S.-sponsored peace talks in Dayton, Ohio, with the so-called Dayton Agreement. 

MID3551 covers the break up of the former Yugoslavia and the fighting in the three former republics of Yugoslavia, Slovenia, Croatia, and Bosnia-Herzegovina. These were civil wars in which the UN and NATO intervened. By 1990 Yugoslavia was plagued with many problems before its breakup. Foreign debt, inflation, and unemployment created a troublesome atmosphere. More important were the strong nationalist feelings and political problems that lead to the crisis in Yugoslavia. In March and April of 1990 Slovenia and Croatia held their first multi-party elections in almost 50 years. The Communist reformers lost to parties favoring national sovereignty within Yugoslavia. Later in the year similar parties won election in Macedonia and Bosnia-Herzegovina. President Izetbegovic of Bosnia-Herzegovina and President Gligorov of Macedonia were looking for a democratic way to keep Yugoslavia a decentralized and reorganized union of states. President Izetbegovic and President Gligorov were concerned about Slovenia and Croatia leaving the Yugoslav federation because they would be left with only President Milosevic of Serbia. Milosevic rejected ideas for a looser federation of Yugoslav states. 

According to the post-Tito Constitution, the federal presidency, the highest executive position, was to be chosen each year by a different Yugoslav state. In 1991 it was Croatia's turn at the federal presidency. They selected Stipe Mesic, a noncommunist and moderate. The Serb leaders blocked the election. The Croatians, authorized by the Croat Parliament, the Sabor, responded by declaring their independence at the end of June 1991. The Sabor created a democratic constitution that guaranteed many civil liberties to all its citizens including the Serbs and other minorities within Croatian borders. It provided the rights for minorities to have their own schools which could teach their own language. In May 1992 the United Nations and the European Community (EC) pushed the Croatian government to go even further by guaranteeing districts self-government where Serbs were the majority. During the spring negotiations of 1991, guerrillas, aided by President Milosevic and Serb leaders, invaded every Serb majority district or village in Croatia and armed villagers who then violently invaded non-Serb majority districts and villages. The Serbs also controlled the federal government's army. 

Macedonia declared its independence on September 8, 1991. The republics of Serbia and Montenegro proclaimed a Federation Republic of Yugoslavia on April 17, 1992. Other countries like the United States, France, and Britain maintained that Yugoslavia should be unified and not divided, therefore, they did not acknowledge the declarations of independence. The German government did acknowledge Slovenia and Croatia as independent and regarded the Serbs as aggressors. Throughout 1992 there were many different peace negotiations offered to President Milosevic. Milosevic found the solutions offered by the UN and EC as unacceptable. Croatia, therefore, organized a military action to recapture control over Serb occupied areas.

There was fierce fighting between Bosnian-Muslims, Serbs, and Croats. The Serbs massacred thousands of Bosnian-Muslims and engaged in ethnic cleansing. The capital, Sarajevo, was surrounded and besieged by Bosnian-Serb forces. A cease-fire was reached February 23, 1994. On March 18, 1994, an accord was signed to create a Muslim-Croat confederation. Fighting continued in 1995 but the balance of power shifted toward the Muslim-Croat alliance. Massive air strikes at Bosnian-Serb targets on August 30, 1995, brought about a new round of peace talks and the siege of Sarajevo ended on September 15, 1995. These new talks created an agreement to create autonomous regions within Bosnia. Tens of thousands of Bosnian-Muslims and Croats were forced to leave their homes to avoid the aggressive attacks of the Serbs. Largely, the military actions of the Bosnians and Croatians were defensive. They were not involved in the systematic ethnic cleansing as were the Serbs. By 1995 the United Nations, Russia, Western European governments, and the United States recognized the independent states of Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina. The international community backed by the power of NATO and the UN assisted Bosnia in achieving a democratic and peaceful transition to independence with a state constitution that allowed rights to its minorities also in order to provide a good example to the Serbs. The UN singled out Serbia as the aggressor in the Bosnian conflict and installed economic sanctions on Serbia. 

A peace agreement initialed in Dayton, Ohio on November 21, 1995 was signed in Paris on December 14, 1995 by leaders of Bosnia, Croatia, and Serbia. About 10,000 NATO troops moved in to police the accord. By August 1996, 45,000 troops remained. Meanwhile a UN tribunal began bringing charges against suspected war criminals. Elections were held on September 14, 1996, for a three-person collective presidency, for seats in a federal parliament, and for regional offices. The UN lifted sanctions against the Serbs on October 1, 1996, after elections were held in Bosnia.

MID4046 took place in April and May of 1994. This mid relates to NATO/US involvement in protecting UN forces involved in UNPROFOR operations. UNPROFOR was initially established in Croatia to ensure demilitarization of designated areas. The mandate was later extended to Bosnia and Herzegovina to support the delivery of humanitarian relief, monitor "no fly zones" and "safe areas". The mandate was later extended to the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia for preventive monitoring in border areas as well. The decision by NATO commanders to provide cover for UN forces came after a February 1994 shelling of a Sarajevo market in which 64 people were killed and more than 200 wounded. In April, UNPROFOR military observers in Gorazde asked for NATO air protection. After approval by the Special Representative of the UN Secretary General, NATO close air support was provided by two U.S. Air Force F-16Cs, which dropped bombs on Serbian ground targets. The following day, UNPROFOR again requested air protection for UN personnel in Goradze. Two U.S. Marine Corps F/A-18A aircraft, under the control of the UN, bombed and strafed targets. This was NATO's first attack of ground targets in the conflict. 

MID4137 occurred from February of 1998 until June of 1999. This is the conflict in Kosovo. After years of rising tensions, in March of 1998, fighting erupts in Kosovo between the majority Albanians and Serbs and within months some 350,000 people have been displaced or fled abroad. In October, 1998, Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic agreed to a cease-fire and partial pull-out of Yugoslav forces and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe sent the first of 2,000 `verifiers' to monitor the agreement. In February, 1999, talks were held in Rambouillet, France, but discussions broke down and tensions and repressions rise again in Kosovo. In March, 1999, after repeated warnings, NATO launched its 78-day air war. Within three days, ethnic Albanians began to arrive in neighboring Albania and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in huge numbers, walking, on tractor-trailers and by car. Authorities expel thousands of persons by special `refugee trains' to Macedonia, virtually emptying all major towns, such as Pristina, of Albanians. From April-May 1999, International agencies, governments and a special humanitarian task force from NATO called AFOR begin to construct dozens of camps for refugees in anticipation they will spend many months in exile. Some 444,600 refugees flee to Albania, 244,500 to Macedonia and 69,900 to Montenegro. Because of political pressures on the Macedonian government, more than 90,000 Albanians are airlifted to 29 countries for temporary safety. On June 3, 1999, Yugoslavia accepted a peace plan requiring withdrawal of all forces from Kosovo and the entry of peacekeepers under a U.N. mandate. On June 12, 1999, Russian and NATO forces entered Kosovo. 

MID4186 and MID4298 both occurred in 2000. These mids occur in the aftermath of the conflict in Kosovo and are related to the withdrawal of forces from Kosovo and the lingering hostility between NATO forces and Serbia as Milosovic tried to hold on to power in his last few months in office. 

The rivalry between the US and Serbia-Montenegro (What is left of the former Yugoslavia) appears to be over. The US established normal trade relation status with Serbia-Montenegro in September of 2003. The most significant event in the change in relations between the two countries was the elections and events surrounding the elections that took place in 2000. Milosovic's rejection of claims of a first-round opposition victory in new elections for the Federal presidency in September 2000 led to mass demonstrations in Belgrade on October 5 and the collapse of the regime's authority. The opposition's candidate, reformed nationalist Vojislav Koštunica took office as Yugoslav president on October 6. 

In response to the events of October 2000, the U.S. reestablished a diplomatic presence the following month. The U.S. embassy reopened in May 2001, and Ambassador William Montgomery presented his credentials to F.R.Y. President Kostunica January 4, 2002. The F.R.Y. embassy in Washington and the U.S. embassy in Belgrade have reestablished bilateral relations.

On April 1, 2001, Milosovic was arrested on charges of abuse of power and corruption. On June 28 he was extradited to the United Nations International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. His trial on charges of genocide in Bosnia and war crimes in Croatia and Kosovo began at The Hague on February 12, 2002. On April 11, the Yugoslav parliament passed a law allowing extradition of all persons charged with war crimes by the International Criminal Tribunal. In March 2002, the Governments of Serbia and Montenegro agreed to dissolve FRY in favour of a new, much weaker form of cooperation called "Serbia and Montenegro". By order of Yugoslav Federal Parliament on February 4, 2003, Yugoslavia ceased to exist. 

SOURCES-CR:
http://campus.northpark.edu/history/webchron/; Associated Press; Reuters; http://home.wanadoo.nl/tcc/balkan/; http://en2.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Yugoslavia

PS-NARRATIVE: 

19459999-19920522 RIV69-0.5 

A United States C-47 transport plane was shot down by Yugoslav fighter planes over Slovenia on August 9, 1946. The crew of the transport plane-which consisted of seven US personnel, two Hungarian personnel, and one Turkish personnel-was captured and detained by Yugoslav troops. The US issued an ultimatum to the Yugoslav government on August 21, 1946, which demanded the release of the crew within 48 hours. Yugoslavia complied with the ultimatum on August 22, 1946.

On January 21, 1948, US told Yugoslavia that the latter had no right to interfere over the Anglo-American zone of Trieste. On March 28, 1950, US and Yugoslavia ended a long-standing dispute over the latter's arrest of US citizens of Yugoslav background who travelled to Yugoslavia. The agreement did not solve the case of approximately 500-600 US citizens that were not allowed to leave Yugoslavia on the grounds that they cannot have dual citizenship and were claimed as Yugoslav citizens. On October 16, 1951, US and Yugoslav officials held talks about setting up a US military advisor group in Yugoslavia. On November 22, 1951, Yugoslavia forced down a US plane that was searching throughout northern Yugoslavia for a C-47 cargo plane that went missing in the area. Later the Yugoslav authorities apologized, as they have given previous permission for the US search and rescue flight to operate in northern Yugoslavia. On April 1, 1952 it was announced that US military aid to Yugoslavia was pouring in. Yugoslavia was not required to pay for this. Marshall Tito's forces were receiving aid under both an older US-Yugoslav agreement and under the newly signed military agreement, too. 

On April 19, 1963, Yugoslavia was urging the United States to understand that it intended to remain an independent socialist non-aligned republic. Yugoslavia did not want to take side between the West and the East. On May 10, 1965, Tito compared the United States policies in Vietnam with those of Hitler and Mussolini throughout Europe. On December 14, 1965, US announced that it will support the Yugoslav Communist economy with credits and debt postponements worth 57 million USD. In a demonstration against US involvement in the Vietnam war 10,000 students destroyed the US Consulate building in Zagreb on December 20, 1966. On October 15, 1968, U.S. Under-Secretary of State, Nicholas Katzenbach made an official visit to Belgrade to show the support of US for Marshall Tito against the implied threats of the Soviet Union. This was the highest ranking official visit from the United States in 5 years. 

On October 27, 1971, Tito was invited for an official visit to Washington by Nixon. There were hopes to improve the relations between the two countries and increase bilateral trade which was at around $100 million per year. On January 18, 1973, US signed an agreement with Yugoslavia to assist and encourage capitalist investments in joint ventures in Yugoslavia. This was the first such agreement signed by US with a Communist country. Edvard Karadelj, the presumed successor of Tito, announced on October 5, 1977, that the Yugoslav-United States relations were better than ever. His statement came after a visit to Washington in which he met with President Carter, Vice President Mondale, and members of the U.S. Congress.

On May 4, 1980, US President Carter called Tito a `towering figure' and ensured the international community that the US will stand by Yugoslavia to protect its independence, territorial integrity, and unity. 

On February 1, 1984, President Mika Spiljak of Yugoslavia met with President Reagan. The two discussed about the US-Soviet Union arms negotiations with the Yugoslavs trying to play a mediating role. President Reagan said that the United States strongly supports Yugoslavia's independence and policy of non-alignment. This was the first visit by a Yugoslav president to the United States since Tito's death. 

Prime Minister Ante Markovic of Yugoslavia met with President Bush of US on October 13, 1989, in an effort to get US assistance for economic and political changes opposed by the Communist hardliners. He was pressing for US help to ease Yugoslavia's US $19 billion debt.

On July 4, 1991, US Secretary of State James A Baker urges embargo on Yugoslavia. He maintains that Yugoslav army is 'out of control' and 'running amok' in its fight against breakaway republics Slovenia and Croatia. US issued a joint statement with European Community calling for immediate halt to violence and a return of all military forces to their barracks.

The United States imposed a series of diplomatic sanctions on Serbia on May 23, 1992, and denounced the death and destruction in the former Yugoslav republic of Bosnia-Hercegovina and detention of civilians there as a "humanitarian nightmare." The new measures, which represent a policy reversal by Washington, include breaking U.S. military contacts with the Serb-led Yugoslav government, closing Yugoslav consulates in New York and San Francisco, and reducing the U.S. Embassy staff in Belgrade. Secretary of State James A. Baker III announced the steps at 10 Downing St. after a dinner meeting with British Prime Minister John Major and Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd. Later Baker announced that Washington also has decided not to recognize Serbia and Montenegro-the only two Yugoslav republics not to seek independence-as the legal successors to the disintegrating country until all of the Serb-led forces are withdrawn from neighboring states and minority rights are respected. Until a few days ago, Washington encouraged European nations to take the lead in addressing the violence, which is close at hand for the nations of the continent. Earlier this week, however, Washington acted first in revoking the landing rights in the United States of the Yugoslav airline JAT, and later it went ahead of the Europeans with the new list of measures, which were made known in advance to members of the European Community through diplomatic notes sent to their capitals. The greater activism on the part of the U.S. administration appeared to reflect frustration that the European Community has been divided on and relatively inactive in dealing with the violence. It also appeared to be a response to increasing criticism in the United States about the passivity of U.S. policy.

20010120-20159999 0.5

On October 7th, 2000, Slobodan Milosevic resigned, after losing the elections. The United States lifted economic sanctions against Yugoslavia on January 20, 2001, to set the seal on renewed ties and underpin the new leadership of Yugoslav President Vojislav Kostunica. Bush told President Vojislav Kostunica of Yugoslavia on May 10, 2001, that American financial aid to Belgrade would depend on cooperation with the war crimes tribunal at The Hague. Mr. Kostunica did not commit to handing over his predecessor, Slobodan Milosevic, but did say that he was pushing to have his country's law changed by the end of May so that Belgrade can cooperate with the international tribunal investigating war crimes against ethnic Albanians in Kosovo in 1999. The White House saw Mr. Kostunica's remarks as a first step and an evolution in his thinking from just a month ago when he refused outright to hand over the former president. But administration officials continued to press Mr. Kostunica to move further and allow a foreign trial of Mr. Milosevic. Washington holds considerable leverage as Mr. Kostunica tries to attract foreign investment to rebuild his battered country. Yugoslavia was invited to rejoin the World Bank this week but the White House has said it will not take part in a donors' conference where Belgrade is seeking to raise as much as $1 billion to recover from more than a decade of war, economic sanctions and misrule. In a speech at the Cato Institute, a conservative public policy center in Washington, Mr. Kostunica urged the West to give his country "a shot of economic adrenaline" without imposing political conditions on the assistance. He spoke of the importance of trying Mr. Milosevic in Yugoslavia to promote justice among the people who suffered under his leadership. "Justice is very important because we have been living for a long time with something that is contrary to justice," Mr. Kostunica said. "It should be in their hands and not the hands of foreigners." The new president, who translated the Federalist Papers into Serbian years ago, invoked the founding of America in urging officials in the United States to give Yugoslavia time to evolve. "Democracy cannot be imposed by above," he said in his speech, adding, "We understand that you do not want to be mired in our region indefinitely." The Bush administration took pains to send Mr. Kostunica a dual message: praise for Yugoslavia's democratic progress coupled with a firm demand that Belgrade extradite Mr. Milosevic. Mr. Kostunica was granted a meeting with Vice President Dick Cheney at the White House and Mr. Bush dropped by for about 10 minutes with Condoleezza Rice, his national security adviser. "The president stated clearly that Milosevic must face justice for his international crimes," said Mary Ellen Countryman, a White House spokeswoman. She added that Mr. Bush welcomed the improved relations between the United States and Yugoslavia and that he was ready to help Belgrade with its democratic transition once Mr. Kostunica agreed to cooperate with The Hague. Mr. Kostunica received more pressure from Secretary of State Colin L. Powell. Richard Boucher, the State Department spokesman, said the disagreement over Mr. Milosevic did not compare to the divisions between the United States and Yugoslavia in recent years. "The context in which we're meeting is not a context of negotiating over some horrible things that have happened but it's of discussing cooperation over some wonderful things that have happened," Mr. Boucher said. 

The Yugoslav military arrested a U.S. diplomat and a former Yugoslav general at a restaurant just outside Belgrade, the Yugoslav capital, on March 15, 2002 and charged them with espionage, according to Yugoslav and Western officials. The detentions, in which the American reported being bundled into a police wagon with a jacket over his head, roughed up and held incommunicado for 15 hours, have triggered a furious diplomatic row with the United States and Western allegations that the military is trying to destabilize democratic institutions. According to reports in the Yugoslav media, officials in Belgrade contend that the former general, Momcilo Perisic, had given the American secret documents that could help in the United Nations' war crimes prosecution against former Yugoslav president Slobodan Milosevic that is underway in the Netherlands. 

On March 17, 2002, the Yugoslav military released a former general whom it had arrested and accused of giving secret military documents to a U.S. diplomat. The diplomat was also detained and held incommunicado for 15 hours. The United States and Serbia, Yugoslavia's dominant republic, accused the army of fabricating evidence. Western officials said the arrests raised profound questions about whether elements within the army were committed to the country's new democracy. Serbian Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic said the military's intelligence arm informed neither its political superiors nor the military brass before arresting the two men, plus a Yugoslav military officer and a civilian, in a restaurant south of Belgrade. Djindjic said the military intelligence service has "gone out of control." The incident has strained relations between Yugoslav authorities and the government of Serbia. The army falls under the ostensible political control of Yugoslav President Vojislav Kostunica, who has infuriated Western officials by refusing to purge military leaders appointed by ousted president Slobodan Milosevic. Over Kostunica's objections, the Serbian government handed Milosevic over to the international war crimes tribunal in The Hague, where he is on trial for genocide and crimes against humanity during the Yugoslav wars. Kostunica appeared to defend the military action when he said, "According to everything I have learned so far, and I repeat so far, the legality of the procedure itself, from the standpoint of domestic procedure, is not disputable." Kostunica's comments were likely to further alienate the United States. The arrests come as Congress is about to consider whether Yugoslavia is cooperating sufficiently with the war crimes tribunal to warrant continued financial aid. The State Department said it was outraged by the arrests and the treatment of John David Neighbor, the first secretary at the U.S. Embassy in Belgrade, who was allegedly manhandled and held with his head covered for extended periods. A Western official said the Yugoslav Foreign Ministry had apologized in a diplomatic note for the treatment of Neighbor and that the United States was satisfied the matter had been resolved. Western officials cautioned, however, that Yugoslavia needs to resolve problems about the role of its army. Media reports in Belgrade said the military was accusing Momcilo Perisic, a former Yugoslav army general who now is a deputy prime minister of Serbia, of giving documents to Neighbor that would buttress the prosecution's case in Milosevic's trial. Perisic was commanding general of the Yugoslav army until he was fired by Milosevic just before NATO went to war with Yugoslavia over its treatment of ethnic Albanians in the Serbian province of Kosovo in 1999. Perisic went on to form a political party and was a leading figure in the popular revolution that swept Milosevic from power in 2000. Since then, Perisic has been increasingly critical of the military and in particular his successor, Gen. Nebojsa Pavkovic, who was appointed by Milosevic but retains Kostunica's support. "I am released and I believe I am not guilty," Perisic said today. The state news agency Tanjug said, however, that a military court had forwarded criminal charges to army prosecutors. One of Perisic's aides, Nebojsa Mandic, said the former general was "ready to appear before state authorities . . . and reveal a plot against him and the people of Serbia." 

On 25 July, 2003, Serbian Prime Minister Zoran Zivkovic has said the objective of his visit to the United States is to deepen political dialogue and promote cooperation between Washington and Belgrade. This means there were no numbers, dates or other such things that people usually expect from such meetings. This is the strengthening of political ties between the two states and the objective is to persuade the United States that Serbia can be a good partner in the Balkans, while the other objective is to find a good ally for all the tribulations in store at the beginning of the 21st century, the prime minister said in an interview to BBC Radio. Asked about the predominant topic during his talks with Secretary of State Colin Powell and national security adviser Condoleezza Rice, Zivkovic said it was their support to reforms and what has been done through them in the past two and a half years, especially in the past few months, the fight against crime, and the state's stand on The Hague international tribunal. Talks also covered the participation of Serbian companies in the reconstruction of Iraq and possibilities for Serbia's business returning to the United States, and a contract on normal trade relations-the bill that has been tied up in the Senate for quote some time, Zivkovic said.

US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice has certified assistance to Serbia-Montenegro [SCG] for 2005, the Department of State has announced on June 14, 2005. State Department spokesman Sean McCormack said that Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice decided that Serbia-Montenegro satisfied the criteria under the foreign assistance law. Draft military agreements that Undersecretary of State Nicholas Burns submitted to SCG Defence Minister Prvoslav Davinic on 9 June, 2005, are just as important as the signal that the United States has sent to the Serbian authorities as well as to international institutions by unfreezing financial assistance, according to Danas's interviewees, commenting on the latest US change of course in relations with Serbia-Montenegro. Ivo Vejvoda, director of the Balkan Fund for Democracy, told our newspaper that the unfreezing of financial assistance to Serbia-Montenegro is "the most reliable indicator that things are changing for the better at an accelerated pace". "I doubt if the US Administration would have taken such a step if it had not received firm assurances that Serbia-Montenegro would meet the condition and send the remaining indictees to the Hague tribunal [International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia-ICTY]," Vejvoda said. He said that the unfreezing of financial assistance is both a financial help and an important signal sent to partners abroad. Nebojsa Medojevic, executive director of the influential Group for Change, sees the unfreezing of aid as a continuation of the US policy of alternate thawing and cooling of relations. "There will now probably follow new demands in connection with the extradition of Ratko Mladic, especially since the screening of video footage about Srebrenica. In economic terms, this aid is not spectacular, but rather a matter for internal consumption, so that the government could say, 'Who says that the United States does not support us and that our government is not successful'," Medojevic told Danas. As for two draft agreements brought by US Undersecretary of State Nicholas Burns to SCG Defence Minister Prvoslav Davinic, which have to do with improving relations between the armies of the United States and Serbia-Montenegro and their cooperation, military analyst Veljko Kadijevic said that, in strategic terms, this is a crucial matter, because cooperation between the SCG and US armies and cooperation between Serbia-Montenegro and the United States in general is at the very top of foreign policy priorities. He said that this cooperation would help solve problems in crisis areas, such as Kosovo and, by corollary, in southern Serbia as well. "Cooperation is important also to the SCG defense system itself and represents the army's strategic commitment, especially where it has to do with personnel training and with the technical equipping of the army, because at the moment there is no purchasing of equipment from the United States; finally, it has military economic importance as well," Kadijevic told Danas.

On September 5, 2006, it was announced that during his trip to the United States, Serbian President Boris Tadic will present Serbia's state policy in the negotiating process for addressing the status of Kosmet [Kosovo-Metohija]. Prior to his departure, Tadic said it was very important to discuss the question in the United States and recalled that solving the status of Kosmet was essential for Balkan stability.

On November 22, 2006, it was declared that the State Department has not failed to take note of last week's message, from the highest quarter in Belgrade, that over the next few months the West should not be carried away with the notion that Serbia will do anything over the extradition of Ratko Mladic or the other commitments towards the war crimes Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia that have lain in abeyance for years. President Tadic's explanation regarding this moratorium, which he gave after parliamentary elections were called for 21 January 2007(along the lines of "No government would make such a move at such a delicate pre-election juncture"), drew no public reaction in Washington since it was not difficult to predict. Otherwise, the sharp and prompt US response to this latest challenge from Belgrade would have followed the pattern that has already been heard in the corridors here. For a start it would have been in the form of a question: "All this business concerning Mladic and the other fugitives from The Hague-why is it that the authorities in Serbia have waited so long, and why is it that the matter has not been closed in the six years since the fall of Milosevic?" But for the time being, questions like this are left for discussions behind closed doors. As far as the United States is concerned, the "election blackout" over the Serbian polls is well and truly in place and will remain in force right up until 21 January. This is all part of the clearly expressed efforts here not to jeopardise if at all possible the success of the democratic forces in their forthcoming electoral showdown with the black and red coalition of the successors of Seselj and Milosevic. But this whole game of hide-and-seek is, of course, linked with facing up to the truth regarding the forthcoming "conditional independence" of Kosovo, whose international presentation has been put back to the period after the January elections in Serbia. In the meantime, however, one other condition is super-topical in relations between Washington and Belgrade-Serbia's joining the Partnership for Peace as the antechamber to the western military alliance, and thence to the EU. The problem, however, lies in the fact that for the time being the US Administration is not showing any readiness to retreat from its firm position on this matter, which is so important for Serbia and which will soon be discussed at the NATO summit in Riga (28 and 29 November); and that firm position is that Serbia's accession to the Partnership for Peace is directly conditional upon the fulfilment of the well-known obligation that Belgrade has concerning the extradition of Mladic and the five other fugitives from the Hague Tribunal. It is true that during the preparations for the summit in Riga, there has been talk at NATO headquarters in Brussels of the option of taking as one package the question of Serbia, Bosnia-Hercegovina and Montenegro as the last remaining candidates for joining the Partnership for Peace. But as far as one gathers from the relevant quarters in Washington, the Americans are not at all keen on this initiative, especially as far as Serbia is concerned. They are staying consistent in their demand that before Belgrade is given the green light for joining the Partnership for Peace, it must first fulfill all obligations concerning Mladic and all the others and anything else that is being asked of Serbia by The Hague. The question of Bosnia-Hercegovina is being equally strictly linked to the extradition of Radovan Karadzic. And given the assumption that the former Serb Republic leader could be hiding somewhere in Montenegro, the government in Podgorica is also under that burden from The Hague (albeit to a lesser extent), even though the independent Montenegro has recently received a number of plus points from the Americans, especially after the recent visit by erstwhile Pentagon chief Rumsfeld. All in all, Serbia is in a specific, and the most difficult, position of the last trio of Balkan candidates for the Partnership for Peace. As the gathering in Lithuania of the heads of state or government of the NATO countries approaches, this has made Belgrade's diplomacy intensify its efforts to make the United States better disposed towards the initiative of the group of European members of NATO on Serbia's "conditional participation" in the Partnership for Peace. In this connection, messages are being sent, directly or indirectly, from Belgrade to Washington regarding "readiness for full implementation of the Action Plan for cooperation with The Hague," as well as the attendant "clear distancing" from the Milosevic regime's war crimes policies. While positive assessments are emerging from the Pentagon with regard to the recent series of agreements on military cooperation between the United States and Serbia, as yet there has been no parallel reaction from the State Department and other points where US foreign policy is being made that would indicate that these positive vibrations are also having an impact on changing the American stand towards the "conditional admission" of Serbia to the Partnership for Peace. "For a start, perhaps it would not be a bad thing for Prime Minister Kostunica to support Belgrade's assurances with a concrete statement on efforts to arrest Ratko Mladic on the basis of his indictment for war crimes," one of Danas's sources from the ranks of the Administration said on this subject, noting that all of America's NATO allies are "fully agreed" regarding this suggestion.

PS-SOURCES: New York Times November 23, 1951, October 17, 1951, March 29, 1950, January 22, 1948, April 11, 1952, December 21, 1966, May 11, 1965, December 15, 1965, April 20, 1963, January 19, 1973, October 28, 1971, October 16, 1968, May 5, 1980, October 5, 1977, February 2, 1984, October 14, 1989, May 10, 2001, BBC July 25, 2003, September 6, 2006, November 22, 2006, Washington Post March 16, 2002, March 17, 2002, September 30, 2004, June 14, 2005, The Globe and Mail January 20, 2001, The Observer March 17, 2002, Philadelphia Inquirer July 4, 1981, November 10, 1991, Washington Post May 23, 1992

MARITIME-MIDS:

MARITIME-DISPUTE:

Discussion:
