FILE: cm200220v11.0.txt
DYAD: UNITED KINGDOM-FRANCE
RIVALRY: RIV394
DISPUTE(S): MID501 MID217 
RIVALRY: RIV395
DISPUTE(S): MID212 MID196 MID2300 MID152 MID77 
RIVALRY: RIV396
DISPUTE(S): MID235 

PS: 19009999-19450508 .5 19450509-19920206 0.75 19920207-20170328 1.00 20170329-20201231 -9

PS-UPDATE2020: This dyad enters a transition period from the time that the UK gives notice of leaving the EU (20170329) to the date that Brexit becomes final (20201231)

PSNOTES:

PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20220220
PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20220220

Pre-1900 MIDs: MID501 MID217 MID212 MID196 MID2300 MID152 MID77 

WWII MIDs: MID235 

RIVNOTES: 
RIV396: MID258 removed in because does not appear in the COW dyadic 3.1 data or the Maoz 2.0 dyadic data. 

RIV394: MID25 was completely recoded for MID3.02, now it is Netherlands versus UK, France, and Belgium.

NARRATIVE-CM: 
Britain and France submitted a dispute concerning fishing boats near Muscat to the *Permanent Court of Arbitration *(PCA) on October 13, 1904. The PCA tribunal issued a decision on August 8, 1905. Britain and France disputed the British apprehension of an Indian national in Marseilles on July 8, 1910 (British police were extraditing the individual to India when he escaped from British custody in Marseilles). France argued that Britain had lost jurisdiction over the individual when he escaped to French territory. The countries agreed to submit the dispute to the PCA on October 25, 1910. The PCA issued a decision in favor of Britain on February 24, 1911. Britain and France disputed the status of British nationals in French Tunisia and French Morocco after decrees were issued in those territories on November 8, 1921. Britain referred the matter to the *League of Nations* (LON) Council on August 11, 1922. On October 4, 1922, the LON Council asked the *Permanent Court of International Justice* (PCIJ) for an advisory opinion as to whether or not the dispute was a matter of domestic jurisdiction. The PCIJ issued an advisory opinion on February 7, 1923, which suggested that the dispute was not a matter solely within the jurisdiction of France. Britain and France signed an agreement regarding the nationality of children of British nationals in Tunisia on May 24, 1923. Britain and France disputed the arrest of a French national by British troops in Iran in 1918. The countries agreed to submit the dispute to the PCA on March 4, 1930. The PCA issued a decision in favor of France on June 9, 1931. Britain and France disputed the sovereignty of the Ecrehous and Minquiers islands (channel islands). The *International Court of Justice* (ICJ) held hearings from September 17 to October 6, 1953. The ICJ issued a decision in favor of Britain on November 17, 1953.

SOURCES-CM: 
*American Journal of International Law *(AJIL), 1911 (vol.5), 208-210, 520-523; *Keesing*, December 26, 1953-January 2, 1954; Stuyt, 1990, 310, 406; *Survey of International Affairs *(SIA), 1925 (supplement), 100.

NARRATIVE-CR:
After Napoleon's defeat and the Congress of Vienna, relations between France and the United Kingdom improved markedly. The United Kingdom turned inward during the 1820s to face the economic downturn that followed the Congress of Vienna. Foreign adventures were quite expensive; to save money British involvement in European politics was limited. 

Thus the United Kingdom largely avoided becoming entangled in domestic unrest in the German states, in Italy, and in Spain throughout the 1820s. Although the Spanish case and the Near East do diminish British-French cooperation during this time. The Battle of Navarino Bay is the most significant British action of the decade, which was a brief and decisive victory for a combined British-French-Russian fleet against a Turkish-Egyptian navy. 

However by the 1830s, the question of an independent Belgium led to tensions between the UK and France. The Belgian question can be traced to the Peace of Paris, which was signed on 30 May 1814. This agreement settled the territorial issues that remained between the Netherlands and Prussia. The Prussian occupation of 1814 was ended, and the Belgians, who "were notoriously incapable of organizing, ruling, and defending themselves (Schroeder 561)" were incorporated into the basic structure of the United Netherlands as a bulwark against France (Schroeder 509, 560-1). 

The region was renamed the South Netherlands. Although Belgium began to prosper and develop once again, the move was ill-fated because of differences in language and religion, and also because Dutch King William's government did not pay adequate attention to Belgian interests. In particular, the barrier between the French speaking Belgians and the Dutch Belgians was too great to be overcome by the House of Orange. Led primarily by residents of the country's French-speaking south in response to an economic downturn, a revolt began in 26 August 1830. Schroeder also traces the revolt to the attempts by William I, King of the United Netherlands, to establish the United Netherlands as a great power in the region. These ambitions, it is argued, fueled the unrest that was to follow for the next eight years. 

In early September, William invited UK, Austria, Prussia, and Russia to advise him about the demands made by the Belgians, after the Germanic states offered no effective assistance. Once William determined that he had little outside support, he sent his son and 14000 troops to end the Belgian bid for independence. By 27 September 1830, Dutch forces were compelled to retreat, and William asked for outside assistance.

Within Belgium, on 26 September 1830 a provisional government was established. This government summoned a national congress to draw up a constitution on 4 October 1830. This declaration of independence, combined with William's plea caused other states in Europe to intervene.

The 4 November 1830 London Conference was an attempt by other European states to settle the issue. This conference lasted for several months and offered several proposals which were designed to allow for the establishment of an independent Belgium which were acceptable to both the Belgians and the Netherlands. After it is evident that there is no simple resolution to the impasse, France and the United Kingdom take the lead in 20 December 1830 by declaring the dissolution of The United Netherlands and thus essentially recognizing the independence of Belgium. This was followed by a proposal to settle the dispute on 20 and again 27 Jan 1931. The Dutch accepted, but the Belgians rejected these two peace initiatives.

By summer 1831, the Belgian government began to take shape. On 4 June 1831, the Belgians elect as their king Leopold of Saxe-Coburg. Leopold is chosen after the initial candidate, which was preferred by the Belgians was effectively vetoed by France following a protest by the United Kingdom on 5 February 1831 [MID501]. The Duke of Nemours rejected his election by the Belgian national congress due to pressure from Louis Phillipe (King of France). France believed that a Belgian king that was too close to France would cause other states to resist violently, thus they pressured the Belgians to choose a non-French king. Although Leopold was not French, he was to marry a French princess to maintain ties with the French and satisfy the Belgians. 

The election of Leopold was followed by another attempt to settle the issue, which again came from the London conference. On 26 June 1831 The Eighteen Articles were drawn up in London to settle the issue. This settlement ceeded more to the Belgians, who accepted, but now the King of Holland, William, rejected the proposed agreement. 

In yet another attempt to force the issue, on 2 August 1831 William sent Dutch troops into Belgium. The Belgian resistance is defeated, but Wiliam was forced to withdraw by a French army that was determined to protect Belgian independence from Holland, but not necessarily from France. The French entered on 11 August at Leopold's request. The United Kingdom initially supported the French movement as the British desired an independent Belgium (independent from the Netherlands and the French). However once the French were in Belgium it was difficult for the UK to ensure their eventual departure. This led to British involvement, retreat (between 15-17 August 1831) and re-involvement in the dispute [MID25].

Diplomatic progress was made in the next series of proposals from the London Conference which were presented on 14 October 1831. The Twenty Four Articles revised the agreement to be more favorable to Holland, but still William refused to sign the agreement. In the face of Dutch intransigence, on 15 November, the United Kingdom and France signed a treaty with Belgium based on the Twenty Four Articles, lending de facto support to the claim of Belgian independence, which had begun with the dissolution of the United Netherlands. This action by France and the United Kingdom was not popular among the more conservative great powers (Russia, Austria, and Prussia), who saw this as appeasement towards revolutionaries. However, this disagreement was not enough to overcome the geographical advantage that the British and French enjoyed in Belgium. As long as Belgium was not annexed by France, the desires of the French and British would win the day. Following the French and British treaty with Belgium, William signs an armistice based on the status quo with Belgium on 21 May 1831. 

The armistice does not lead to a full settlement of the issue. "In late summer 1832, the two Western powers decided that William had to be coerced" (Schroeder 689). The British blockaded the Scheldt River in November of 1832, as the French army beseiged Antwerp (690). [MID368] Austria also threw its weight into an attempt to settle the issue by convincing William to accept the Twenty Four Articles, but again the effort was not sufficient. Finally, seven years later, on 19 April 1839 William accepts an agreement which in substance is similar to the Twenty Four points. The Dutch were successful in getting some territorial concessions in Luxemborg and Limburg, which were divided among Holland and Belgium. Perhaps the largest winner in the struggle was the United Kingdom, which benefited from the Scheldt River being declared open to commerce. The signing of the agreement recognized Belgium's independence with Prince Leopold of Saxe-Coburg as its king and assured its independence with a great power guarantee.

This diplomatic success signaled an era of suspicious cooperation between France and the UK. Despite disparate goals in Belgium, Spain, and the Near East, the British and French were able to coexist peacefully in Europe after Belgian independence. Not until 1840 did the rivalry flare up again, this time in the Middle East. 

The fate of the Ottoman Empire concerned all of Europe. Russia threatened the autonomy Turkey, while the insurrection in Egypt which was orchestrated by Mohamed endangered the very existence of the Ottoman Empire. France was primarily concerned that Russia would ultimately control the Ottoman Empire, and thus was sympathetic to the Egyptian insurgents. The United Kingdom was also concerned about the health of Turkey and initially sided with France on the issue. However, Russia was aware of French suspicions and courted the British by asserting that Syria, which Mohamed had taken from the Porte, should be returned to the Ottoman Empire. This would weaken Mohamed, strengthen the Porte, however it did little to limit Russian influence in the region as Russia still controlled the Black Sea. France, which had supported Egyptian control in Syria disagreed. 

This disagreement led to a rapid shift in British policy away from France and towards Russia. In the fall of 1839, Britain moved away from supporting France and "by mid-September... [Palmerston] discussed how Britain and Russia could force France into line, with or without the help of the German powers, just as in June and July he had spoken about an Anglo-French or Anglo-French-Austrian coalition to stop Russia" (Schroeder 739). This falling out with France led to a secret conference between Russia, Britain, Austria, and Prussia where the four powers sign an agreement to settle the Egyptian-Ottoman dispute. France was outraged at being left out of the conference and being notified of the agreement after it was signed. The settlement called for Mohamed to cease attacking Turkey; the terms of the agreement states that the sooner that Mohamed complied, the more territory that he would be allowed to retain. Seeking French aid, and getting little, Mohamed tried to resist, but was ultimately forced to retreat after British ships shelled Beirut in September 1840, and Turkish troops which were reinforced with Austrian and British marines then landed and pushed Mohamed back to he Egyptian border. In early October France resisted strongly, even going so far as to threaten war if Mohamed were removed from Egypt. However the Thiers ministry in France was replaced in late October and the new ministry was far less bellicose. Approximately five weeks later, on 27 November 1840, Mohamed surrendered to the Ottoman Empire and lost Syria. 

The Spiezzia crisis arose in Europe when the Russians made a largely symbolic move against the Prince of Bulgaria. Russia asked Turkey to denounce the election of Ferdinand of Coburg as the Prince of Bulgaria on 13 February 1888. The French and the Germans supported the Russian demand, while the Austrians, British, and Italians opposed it. The sultan in Turkey happily asserted that the election was illegal on 4 March 1888, but nothing came of it. Ferdinand remained in Bulgaria and Russia's demand was met by Turkey (Taylor 323-4). 

France and Britain almost clashed in Thailand five years later over a report received in London on 30 July 1893, which claimed that France demanded the withdrawal of all British warships from Siam. French colonial holdings in Indo-China were bringing them close to British India, and the last buffer between them was Siam (now Thailand). England asked for German assistance to combat France, but before a decision to fight had been made, the report was discovered to be false. Britain maintained Siam as a buffer state (to the dismay of the Indian government) France did not contest Siam, and the dispute quickly ended (Taylor 342-3).

After the scare in the Far East, tensions ran much higher in North Africa three years later. Italy was doing poorly in the Abyssinian campaign in 1896; this did little to contain French influence in the area, so the British decided to "reconquer the Sudan, ostensibly to aid the Italians, [but] really to forestall the French" (Talyor 367). The British advance led to conflict with the French, which was not settled until 15 June 1898 when France settled the issue of the border of West Africa with the British (Taylor 378).

Fashoda was in many ways an extension of the tensions between France and England that had begun with the British invasion of Sudan in 1896. Taylor claims that French politicians knew that they were no match for the British if it were to come to a military contest in Egypt since the early 1890s, however France made an attempt to save some face and this led to the Crisis. In September of 1898, a British army under Kitchener defeated the last of the resistance in Sudan. This force then began moving up the Nile River towards the French forces stationed at Fashoda. The combination of the Mediterranean fleet and this land army was simply too much for the French to resist. France did look for allies, but Russia and Germany refused to assist, as they each had their reasons for wanting less rather than more French influence in North Africa. On November 4 1898 Marchand, the French commander at Fashoda, surrendered.

The only series of conflicts between France and Britain in the 20th century revolve around the French capitulation to Germany and the installation of the Vichy Regime in France. The last MID258 is titled as "World War II". Churchill was in charge of British foreign policy for the duration of the MID series. Prime Minister Reynaud controlled France prior to the installation of the Vichy Regime, after which the commander in chief was Marshal Petain who negotiated the armistice with Germany and set the terms. Following the Vichy Regime General Charles de Gaulle became the head of the de facto, and subsequently provisional government (Thomas 1979; also see Aron 1958). 

The installment of Petain occurred on June 15th and soon afterward an armistice was sought with Germany (on the 22nd) despite the disapproval of France's ally Great Britain. The series of MIDs is coded as ending in 1941 which corresponds to allied forces gaining control over North Africa as well as the removal of Petain as head of state, but a more appropriate ending period might be the installment of de Gaulle as head of state in October of 1944 (Thomas 1979). While a treaty did not signal the resolution to the conflict, the installment of a new republican style government headed by someone that Churchill saw as ethical and a compatriot was enough to end all aggressions between the two nations.

The conflict between Britain and France emerged with the last few days of French resistance to German forces and with the removal of Reynaud as head of state. The British felt that French resistance to German advances was not complete and that the Battle of France was lost because of incomplete and incompetent tactics by the French generals (Thomas 1979). The French claimed that British commitment to the defense of France had not been complete and that during the evacuation of forces at Dunkirk, the French forces had been left to fend for themselves (Thomas 1979; also see Aron 1958). 

The British position concerning French surrender was also a point of tension. The French parliament was seeking to break with the March agreement (which was the binding force of the Anglo-French alliance) and sign a separate peace treaty with Germany. Britain acknowledged the need for French ground forces to surrender but suggested that the Navy, Air Force, arms, gold and strategic resources be transferred to British control, all oil reserves be destroyed and the official government of France move to either North Africa or London (Thomas 1979). Confusion between British demands and French plans of action resulted in the French government thinking that France had Britain's blessing to break the March agreement and seek terms with Germany. On June 16th Paris fell, Reynaud resigned and was succeeded by Petain who immediately sought terms from Germany.

The terms that Germany demanded from France were strategically designed to neutralize all resistance from France and to deny any resources for the Allied forces. Germany promised that it would not occupy French territory and that it would leave the control over France in the hands of a French state. In addition the Germans did not demand the surrender of the French fleet. All that Germany wanted was the dismantling of the French navy so it might not be used against Germany and that the new Vichy regime seek to prevent any French collaboration with the Allied forces (Thomas 1979). 

Britain regarded the actions of the Vichy regime as illegal because of the French commitment to the March Agreement, which prohibits a separate peace treaty with the axis powers. The power of the Vichy regime came from its ability to ensure that the French fleet would not aid the British and that the colonial territories would not fall into allied hands (Thomas 1979). However, the power of the Vichy regime faded almost immediately as the Free France forces headed by Charles de Gaulle in North Africa refused the legitimacy of the Vichy government and continued to support and aid Allied forces. By 1942 the Allied forces in conjunction with French forces under de Gaulle's control occupied North Africa and ceased French ships for their cause. 

Because the Vichy regime could not hold up the terms of the agreement, German occupation of the former Free Zone occurred in 1943 and in response the navy still in French ports was scuttled to prevent German forces from taking control. The Vichy regime had effectively been eliminated by this point and by October of 1944 a new provisional government was in place headed by de Gaulle. British Prime Minister Churchill threw his support behind de Gaulle as the rightful head of state in France and aggressions between the British and French states officially were laid to rest (Thomas 1979; also see Aron 1958). 

SOURCES-CR:
Aron 1958; Thomas 1979

MARITIME-MIDS:

MARITIME-DISPUTE:

Discussion:
