FILE: cm200850v11.0.txt
DYAD: UNITED KINGDOM-INDONESIA
RIVALRY: RIV10484
DISPUTE(S): MID3198 MID1070 MID2918 

RIVNOTES: 
RIV10484 was formerly two separate rivalries (RIV484 and RIV485), but these were combined because all the disputes involved similar issues of decolonization and the disputes were relatively close (<11 years) in time.

PS: 19491227-19510902 0.25 19510903-19660425 0.00 19660426-19710425 0.5

PSNOTES: 

PS-UPDATE2020: 
Revision based on a new relationship rule that when a rivalry terminates and the rivalry is the only basis for a relationship, then the relationship continues for 5 years and is coded as negative peace (.5) and then the relationship ends thereafter.


PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20220228
PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20220228

Territorial-Maritime-Boundary Issues Variables

MID3198 

TERRMID: MID3198 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID3198 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID3198 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID3198 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID3198 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID3198 3 -- uncertain 
MARITMID-NOTES: MID3198 from Gibler, Miller, and Little (2016), Indonesia detained 4 UK ships and 2 Panamanian ships in September 1951. The ships were soon released, but there was no protest from UK or Panama. Coded not maritime because no maritime boundary was being disputed, and coded uncertain because GLM recommend this case be dropped due to lack of protest. 

ISLMID: MID3198 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID3198 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID3198 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID3198 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID3198 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID3198 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID3198 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID3198 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID3198 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID3198 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 


MID1070 

TERRMID: MID1070 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID1070 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID1070 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID1070 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID1070 from Gibler (2018) and cm820850 narrative, this MID is centered on the formation of several UK protectorates into the state of Malaysia and Indonesia's opposition to this. When Malaysia formed, Indonesia and Malaysia immediately began disputing the land border at Sabah. Indonesia began threatening force in Malaysia in 1963, and UK began helping to prepare for a military attack. Several clashes over Sabah occurred over the course of this MID. UK is pulled in due to its support for Malaysia. Coded third party link to territorial MID because this is connected to the Sabah territorial dispute between Malaysia and Indonesia. 

MARITMID: MID1070 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID1070 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: MID1070 the maritime border, specifically in the Ambalat Sea, was disputed between Malaysia and Indonesia, but this MID was not connected to that dispute and was outside of this dyad. Also, the fact that Indonesia opposed the creation of Malaysia and claimed all of its territory implies that they disputed the maritime boundary that would accompany the creation of a Malay state. This MID is therefore connected to a maritime boundary as well, but coded not maritime because the UK is a third party linked to the maritime aspect of this MID. 

ISLMID: MID1070 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID1070 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: MID1070 Indonesia also claimed uninhabitable islands off the coast of Malaysia since is claimed all of Malaysia's territory. UK is linked to this dispute which is also an islands MID between Malaysia and Indonesia. 

CIVWARMID: MID1070 3 -- not civil war
CIVWARMID-CER: MID1070 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID1070 the civil conflict activity occured in Malaysia, outside of this dyad. See CIVWARLINK.

CIVWARLINK: MID1070 1 -- civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID1070 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID1070 from Gibler (2018) and cm820850 narrative, Indonesia supported guerrillas in Malaysia as part of its dispute with Malaysia. UK was bound by treaty to protect Malaysia from military attack, and it helped defend against the guerrillas conducting attacks against Malaysia as well. Coded civil war link because this MID involved militarized rebel groups being supported by Indonesia against Malaysia (outside of this dyad).

COUPMID: MID1070 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID1070 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID1070 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID1070 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 


MID2918 

TERRMID: MID2918 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID2918 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID2918 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID2918 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID2918 from Gibler (2018), Indonesia fired at a UK minesweeper in Singaporean waters. From cm narrative, this incident was part of the Malay Confrontation, a 1963-1966 dispute between Indonesia vs. Malaysia and the UK. Indonesia opposed the creation of the Malay state and disputed territory with the new state. Coded third party link to territorial MID because per the cm narrative, this MID is part of that territorial dispute. 

MARITMID: MID2918 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID2918 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: MID2918 Malaysia and Indonesia also disputed a maritime boundary in the Ambalat Sea, but that dispute was connected to oil resources and there is no indication that this MID is connected to the disputed maritime boundary. The fact that Indonesia opposed the creation of Malaysia and claimed that territory means that they also disputed the maritime boundary that Malaysia would have, but that dispute is outside of this dyad. The Malay Confrontation is also a maritime MID between Malaysia and Indonesia, and the UK is linked to that maritime MID.

ISLMID: MID2918 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID2918 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: MID2918 Indonesia also claimed uninhabitable islands off the coast of Malaysia since it claimed all of Malaysia's territory. UK is linked to this dispute which is also an islands MID between Malaysia and Indonesia. 

CIVWARMID: MID2918 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID2918 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID2918 part of the Malay Confrontation involved Indonesia sponsoring militarized rebel groups against Malaysia and UK, but this MID did not involve rebel groups. 

CIVWARLINK: MID2918 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID2918 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID2918 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID2918 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID2918 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID2918 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

NARRATIVE-CM: 

SOURCES-CM:

NARRATIVE-CR:
The rivalry between the United Kingdom and Indonesia revolves around the general issue of decolonization. In the first mid, the UK aids the Netherlands and the Indonesians in the post WWII period. The UK provides security for Indonesia and disarms the occupying Japanese while the Dutch return to reclaim the colony. The Indonesians revolt and part of the violence is directed at the continued British presence in Indonesia. The second set of MIDs is also about decolonization but involves the British more directly. The British protectorates of Sabah and Sarawak are federated with Malaya and granted independence. Indonesia has a claim to Sabah and Sarawak. President Sukarno then establishes a policy of confrontation against the new Malaysian state. Thus the general issue that motivates the rivalry between the UK and Indonesia is decolonization. 

Within months of the establishment of the independent Republic of the United States of Indonesia (USI) a series of violent uprisings occurred in Indonesia. The Dutch were the primary external targets of this violence as they had attempted to reassert control over the colony after World War II, but the British were also involved. In the later stages of the WWII, the British assumed responsibility for Indonesia. British troops were stationed there to disarm Japanese forces and maintain order until a negotiated settlement could be reached between the republican leaders and the Dutch. The years 1950 and 1951 were transition years as the new federal structure of the USI was established and the Dutch administration was dismantled. Some of the revolts that occurred during this time were in response to continued British presence in Indonesia MID3198 (9/1951 to 12/1951). 

MID1070 is a multilateral MID involving the UK, Australia, and Malaysia versus Indonesia. It occurred from February of 1963 until November of 1965. MID2918 is a bilateral MID between the UK and Indonesia occurring in April of 1966. These MIDs constitute the Malay Confrontation. 

The chief concern in these MIDs was the status of Sabah and Sarawak on the island of Borneo. The two territories were British protectorates obtained in the late 19th century. After WWII, the UK proposed federating these territories with Malaya. Indonesia objected to this proposal as it also laid claim to these territories. Indonesia supported opposition political groups and insurgent militias in Sarawak. In April of 1963, Indonesia began infiltrating regular Army troops into Sarawak. At the same time, indigenous forces in Sabah initiated action against the UK. The UK responded by committing troops to assist local police and army units. 

When Japan surrendered at the end of the war, North Borneo (Sabah) was administered by the British Military Administration and in 1946 it became a British Crown Colony. The Crown continued to rule North Borneo (Sabah) until 1963. On August 31, 1963 North Borneo (Sabah) attained self-government. There was a call for complete independence on that date by it was denied by the British Governor who remained in power until Malaysia Day.[4] The intention had been to form Malaysia on August 31 but due to objection from the Philippines and Indonesia, the formation had to be postponed to September 16. On September 16, 1963, North Borneo (Sabah) together with Malaya, Sarawak and Singapore formed the Federation of Malaysia and from then on, it became known as Sabah and declared independent from British sovereignty. 

In September of 1963, the UK granted independence to Sabah and Sarawak. Both then joined a federated state with Malaya BaMalaysia. President Sukarno severed ties with Malaysia and initiated a policy of confrontation with the new state. The fighting intensified with incursions by the UK and the Indonesians across their mutual border (Malaysia-Indonesia.) Indonesia also attacked the Malaysian peninsula and Australian and New Zealand forces aided the Malaysian Army in defense. 

On September 30, 1965, a group of leftist junior military officers attempted a coup d'etat. They kidnapped and killed six high-ranking generals in the Sukarno regime. Ultimately, the coup was not successful and a military group headed by General Suharto suppressed the attempted empted seizure of power. The military, especially General Suharto, subsequently gained increased influence in the country. In the aftermath of the attempted coup, the military and right-wing Muslim groups retaliated against the Indonesian Communist Party (PKI) in what came to be know as the Indonesian Blood Bath. In March of 1966 amid continued unrest throughout the country, President Sukarno was forced to transfer emergency executive powers to Gen. Suharto. From this point on Indonesia's confrontation with Malaysia came to a standstill. 

On August 11 1966, the policy of Confrontation with Malaysia was formally discontinued. Relations between Indonesia and Malaysia improved in the aftermath of what some have referred to as the Borneo War. In August of 1967, Indonesia and Malaysia joined the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand in establishing the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN). 

This change in leadership and the consequent shift in internal politics that influences Indonesian foreign policy is the primary factor associated with the termination of the rivalry between Malaysia and Indonesia that in turn is then the factor also associated with the termination of the rivalry between the United Kingdom and Malaysia. 

SOURCES-CR: 
Bercovitch and Jackson, 1997, 107; Butterworth, 1976, 46 to 50; Tillema; 1991, 260 to 262

19491227-19510902 0.25 

Indonesia declared independence from the Netherlands on August 17, 1945. Britain's leader in Asia, Lord Mountbatten, then in Ceylon, was asked by the Dutch to use Japanese troops still in Indonesia to suppress Indonesian independence. A week later, September 8, 1945, the first British troops arrived, parachuting into Indonesia's capital city, Jakarta-while Japan's navy was surrendering to the Australians. In July 1946, Britain (the United Kingdom) turned over all of Indonesia except the islands of Java and Sumatra to the Dutch. On October 25, 1946, the British 49th Indian Infantry arrived, the British dropping leaflets on the city of Surabaya, in Java, demanding that Indonesia's Republican forces disarm and surrender the city within 24 hours. Three days later the British began advancing into the city. They were driven back. Their commander, Brigadier Mallaby and over 200 of his men were killed. This success encouraged the people of Java and sparked a full scale revolt against the British across the island. 

The British sent in reinforcements. On November 10, 1946, two cruisers and three destroyers together with tanks and artillery began shelling Surabaya while airplanes dropped bombs on rebel strong points. After three days of street fighting the British took Surabaya. The British (largely Indians troops) suffered over 900 killed and wounded. Some excesses had been committed by the British. Britain's Labour government argued that it was doing the job that the Allies had given it-restoring order. Indonesians had died in greater number, estimated at over 10,000, but for some of those fighting under Mallaby the loss of this one man had been too much to bear. According to foreign secretary, Ernest Bevin, after Mallaby's death preventing excesses by Britain's troops had become difficult. On November 29 1946, the last of Britain's troops left Indonesia. The Netherlands tried to reestablish their rule, and an armed and diplomatic struggle ended on December 27, 1949, when in the face of international pressure, the Dutch formally recognized Indonesian independence and sovereignty was transferred. 

In the later stages of the WWII, the British assumed responsibility for Indonesia. British troops were stationed there to disarm Japanese forces and maintain order until a negotiated settlement could be reached between the republican leaders and the Dutch. The years 1950 and 1951 were transition years as the new federal structure of the USI was established and the Dutch administration was dismantled. Some of the revolts that occurred during this time were in response to continued British presence in Indonesia MID3198 (September 1951 to December 1951). 

19660426-20159999 0.5

The last MID of RIV10484, MID2918 ended on April 25, 1966. MID2918 is a bilateral MID between the UK and Indonesia. This MID is part of the Malay Confrontation. On August 11 1966, the policy of Confrontation with Malaysia was formally discontinued. Relations between Indonesia and Malaysia improved in the aftermath of what some have referred to as the Borneo War. With the end of the Indonesian-Malaysian confrontation, UK had not reason to maintain a rivalry with Indonesia and the relations turned towards positive economic relations. Sabah and Sarawak remained within independent Malaysia and Indonesia did not lay claim to these regions anymore. UK withdrew from its colonial lands from Asia. 

When Japan surrendered at the end of the war, North Borneo (Sabah) was administered by the British Military Administration and in 1946 it became a British Crown Colony. The British Crown continued to rule North Borneo (Sabah) until 1963. On August 31, 1963 North Borneo (Sabah) attained self-government. There was a call for complete independence on that date by it was denied by the British Governor who remained in power until Malaysia Day (September 16). The intention had been to form Malaysia on August 31 but due to objection from the Philippines and Indonesia, the formation had to be postponed to September 16. On September 16, 1963, North Borneo (Sabah) together with Malaya, Sarawak and Singapore formed the Federation of Malaysia and from then on, it became known as Sabah and declared independence from British sovereignty. 

The Anglo-Malayan Defence Agreement (AMDA) was set up in 1957 to provide a security umbrella for the newly independent Malaya. AMDA was a bilateral defence agreement. When Malaysia was created in 1963, AMDA was renamed the Anglo-Malaysian Defense Agreement and continued to provide some measure of security to the new federation. AMDA was replaced with FPDA (Five Power Defence Arrangements) which includes UK, Malaysia, Australia, New Zealand and Singapore, in 1971. 

Britain and Australia planned extensive bombing raids over Indonesia in 1964 if Jakarta had stepped up its confrontation with the new Malaysian Federation, secret documents have revealed. The joint action was designed to knock out Indonesia's fledgling air and naval strength in the event of a surprise attack on Malaysia, the Cabinet documents released in London and Sydney under the 30-year rule show. The plan even envisaged that British and Australian military action could result in the disintegration of the Indonesian republic, reminiscent of Britain's 19th-century gunboat diplomacy. At the time the Malaysian Federation, which was made up of an assortment of British colonial territories, including Singapore, was the victim of a series of raids by Jakarta on Sarawak on the island of Borneo, which was shared by Malaysia and Indonesia. The aerial bombardment, codenamed Addington, would have been executed the moment Indonesia launched raids on Malaysian airfields, cities or military targets, with its newly acquired Soviet jet fighters and bombers. The documents show Britain and Australia were anxious that the bombardment could have provoked Indonesia into retaliation against Australia, with air raids, sabotage, and commando incursions targeted against Darwin. The plan to destroy Indonesia's air and naval capabilities was one of several contingency plans designed to escalate gradually military action against Indonesia in response to any attack by President Sukarno. Britain would have borne the brunt of the action by deploying its air force from land bases in Malaysia, Australia, and from aircraft carriers in the Indian Ocean and South China Sea. Darwin was envisaged for use by Australian or British aircraft to strike at more remote Indonesian airfields. Australia agreed to contribute eight Canberra bombers and 28 Sabre fighters. New Zealand would have contributed six Canberras. One Cabinet defense committee policy paper said: ''In the event of (British and Australian) aircraft in Malaya being used in an offensive role, and of Darwin being used to mount airstrikes against Indonesia, there will be the possibility of air attacks against Darwin port or airfield.'' The papers also gave a warning of the possibility of a limited war against President Sukarno leading to the fragmentation of Indonesia into separate states. ''An early detailed examination should be made therefore of the likely effects of the implementation (of the plan) on Australia's future relations with Indonesia as ... it is highly desirable that the Republic of Indonesia remain a viable entity.'' 

On August 11 1966, the policy of Confrontation with Malaysia was formally discontinued. Relations between Indonesia and Malaysia improved in the aftermath of what some have referred to as the Borneo War. With the end of the Indonesian-Malaysian confrontation, UK had not reason to maintain a rivalry with Indonesia and the relations turned towards positive economic relations. 

In 1981, Indonesia's exports to Britain were valued at 141,000,000 dollars, while Britain's imports from Indonesia totaled 261,000,000. Commodities exported included coffee, rubber, timber, edible oils, textiles and tin, while those imported from Britain were cigarettes, chemicals, vehicles, plastic raw materials, paper, telecommunications equipment and aircraft. In January 1982, British Foreign Secretary Lord Carrington made an official visit to Indonesia during which he held talks with President Suharto, Vice-President Adam Malik, Foreign Minister Mokhtar Kusumaatmadja, and Indonesia's Economy Minister. Foreign Minister Mokhtar Kubumaatmadja told reporters that talks with Lord Carrington was fruitful and smooth. He said bilateral relations were taken as the main topic of discussion. He described the relations between Indonesia and Great Britain as being in very good shape now. It was true, he added, that the bilateral relations in one and a half years ago were in somewhat disharmony for an export quota imposed by Britain upon Indonesian textiles. But according to Mokhtar Kusumaathadja, the problem has been solved and the two relations have returned to normal. The Indonesian Foreign Minister said that exchange of information on various problems dominated the talks held between Lord Carrington and the Indonesian side. He quoted the British Foreign Secretary as saying he was very happy with the talks during his stay in Indonesia and hoped to re-visit the country in the future. Well, I could say that both sides are satisfied with the talks and agreed to meet again, Mokhtar Kusumaatmadja said, but he did not mention the date for the next meeting. Questioned whether Indonesia's 1982 export policy was brought up to the meeting with Lord Carrington, Mokhtar Kusumaatmadja said: We dealt with it in a broad perspective. According to him, Lord Carrington understood the policy and expressed readiness to study it further. . . Economic relations between Indonesia and Britain were discussed in detail between Lord Carrington and Indonesia's Economic Minister, Mokhtar Kusumaatmadja said.

On April 11, 1985, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain called for closer collaboration between Britain and Indonesia in exploiting and fostering new technology and scientific achievement. Mrs. Thatcher made the proposal during a four-day visit to Indonesia. She traveled today to an aircraft factory in the West Java capital of Bandung, 112 miles south of Jakarta. "Britain is already contributing to Indonesia's industrialization, particularly in the fields of communications, power generation, oil and gas and civil engineering," she told guests at a luncheon given by B.J. Habibie, minister for research and technology, who is also president director of the factory. "With our experience gained in the often difficult conditions of the North Sea we can help with the further development of your offshore resources in oil and gas," she said. Indonesia produces 1.3 million barrels of oil daily and receives two thirds of its income from oil. It has the biggest oil reserves in southeast Asia. The UK Trade Minister, Mr Paul Channon, who has just returned from a two-and-a-half week journey through South-east Asia aimed at building on the Prime Minister's visit to the region earlier this year, said on July 11,1985, that Britain had offered 'soft' loans to Indonesia. It is widely believed that Britain lost several important contracts there because of the government's refusal to comply with an Indonesian presidential decree which states that bids far contracts which are not put out to tender cannot be accepted unless they are accompanied by loans at non-commercial rates of interest.

Mr Tim Renton, Britain's Foreign Office new minister with responsibility for South-East Asia, is to make his first appearance on the regional stage at a private meeting of top-level diplomats on November 1,1985. He will chair a two-day conference here of ambassadors and high commissioners to ASEAN countries, as Britain begins an aggressive bid for business in Indonesia. An 11-man delegation headed by Lord Remnant, deputy chairman of Ultramar Ltd, will spend next week drumming up trade, particularly in the high technology field, The Mission coincides with the Foreign Office's annual diplomatic review of events and policy in South-East Asia. Officials discount any dramatic shift in strategy, but there will be a reappraisal of growing British interests in what is still one of the world's fastest growing markets, despite a recent decline in growth rates. Mr Renton will also see senior Indonesian politicians during his stay including Dr Ali Warthana, the co-ordinating minister for the Economy, Finance and Industry. Jakarta is looking for an extension of soft loans from Britain, at 3.5 per cent over 25 years, and while a formal announcement is not expected until the end of November, informed sources calculate that the Government will double its pounds 14 million annual aid.

Britain, the largest European investor in Indonesia, is offering itself as Indonesia's gateway to European markets, visiting British Trade Minister Richard Needham said in Jakarta on December 2, 1993. "As we invest in Indonesia, I don't see why Indonesia does not invest in Britain and make Britain its gate to the European market for Indonesia's products," Needham told a Warta Ekonomi business club luncheon. Needham said Britain was committed to the development of Indonesia's economy and pledged to double trade with Indonesia within two or three years. British exports to Indonesia in 1992 reached 450 million dollars but it imported Indonesian goods worth 750 million dollars. Britain's total investment in Indonesia, including oil projects, totaled two billion dollars, making it the largest European investor in Indonesia in the past two years. Needham, who is making his third visit this year to Indonesia, heads a 20-strong trade delegation aimed at boosting bilateral trade, particularly in the transportation, telecommunications, aerospace and banking spheres. Needham is scheduled to meet with several cabinet ministers during his three-day stay in Indonesia.

Britain may offer increased financial assistance for Indonesia, British Chancellor of the Exchequer Kenneth Clarke said on January 4th, 1994. ''We don't have the exact amount yet, but it could be an increase from last year,'' Clarke told a news conference. Britain is the fifth largest contributor in the aid consortium called the Consultative Group for Indonesia. The British provided Indonesia with $98 million in aid for economic and social development last year, up from $35 million the previous year. The whole consortium pledged $5.11 billion in 1993. Clarke also conferred with President Suharto about debt relief for the world's least-developed nations and about promoting relations between Indonesia and Britain.

On February 24th, 1994, British Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd denied allegations that Britain had supplied arms to Indonesia which helped it put down rebel forces in the separatist East Timor region.
Britain will continue to improve its defense ties with Indonesia through defense training, and hopes to sell Hawk fighter planes and Scorpion tanks, a top-ranking British officer said on October 12,1994. Britain's chief of the Defense Staff, Field Marshall Peter Inge, told reporters after meeting Indonesian President Suharto that the human rights issue in East Timor will not harm defense cooperation between the two countries. 'It is not for me to get involved in the politics of another country,' he said. 'Quite clearly it is an issue that concerns some, but what I am concerned with is the working relationship between the armed forces of Britain and Indonesia.' Asked about Britain's hope to sell aircraft to Indonesia, Inge said, 'We are looking to sell certain things like Hawk aircraft, Scorpions and some other things.' Indonesian Armed Forces Commander Gen. Feisal Tanjung, who was accompanying Inge, said Indonesia ordered 24 Hawk trainer and ground attack aircraft from British Aerospace (BAe) last year and plans to order some Scorpion tanks in a few weeks. Indonesia expects delivery of the Hawks to take place in 1996 to replace the nation's aging aircraft and strengthen the air force's combat capability. The Hawk order, worth about 760 million dollars, consists of eight 100 Series two-seater trainers and 16 of the 200 Series single-seat fighters.

Britain could lose its lucrative arms trade with Indonesia if the new Labour government insists on a broad link between human rights and equipment sales, Indonesian Foreign Minister Ali Alatas said on July 2,1997. "If arms sales are linked by any country to what we believe are extraneous issues, then we will simply find other suppliers," he said in an interview with the Financial Times of London. "It's not for nothing that they call it the arms bazaar." Mr Alatas was quoted by the newspaper in a despatch from here. He had apparently discussed Britain's current review of its defence sales policy with British Foreign Secretary Robin Cook on the sidelines of the Hongkong handover ceremonies. Mr Cook had assured him that the review was not directed specifically at Indonesia and that existing contracts would be met. Separately, Mr Cook confirmed that the policy on defence sales was under review. "We are currently reviewing our criteria for arms sales on an overall basis. It may well turn out to have implications for a number of countries, of which Indonesia may be one," he said. "That does not mean we do not wish to have a perfectly proper commercial relationship with Indonesia, which is not just in the interest of Britain, but also in the interest of Indonesia." Britain supplies Indonesia with a large number of Hawk fighter aircraft and other equipment, including riot-control gear. In return, Indonesia has given assurances that the equipment will not be used for repressive purposes or in the former Portuguese territory of East Timor. Suspicions among human-rights lobby groups that British equipment had actually been used for internal repression had made the sales controversial in Britain.

British Foreign Secretary Robin Cook arrived in Jakarta on August 28, 1997, for a two-day visit to discuss the situation in troubled East Timor, human rights and other issues. During his visit to Indonesia, Cook was scheduled to met with Indonesian President Suharto, Foreign Minister Ali Alatas and the government-sponsored national human rights commission. Prior to his departure, Cook said in London he would bring up concerns over human rights in Indonesia and call for urgent progess on the issue of East Timor, a former Portuguese colony annexed by Jakarta 21 years ago. Alatas said earlier this week that he would explain to Cook about human rights in Indonesia, in particular in East Timor. Since taking over from the previous administration, Cook has placed human rights high on Britain's foreign policy agenda. But he said sales of Hawk trainer jet fighters and armored cars to Indonesia, which were signed under the previous government, are to go ahead. Indonesia has received 24 Hawk warplanes, a number of armored cars and riot control equipment that Jakarta purchased from London.

On September 11, 1999, Britain called off arms sales to Indonesia in the wake of angry protests over continued shipments despite worsening bloodshed in the region. Foreign Secretary Robin Cook said a contract to supply nine Hawk aircraft had been suspended, in support of the EU arms embargo, and that action would be taken to halt all further weapons exports. And he warned the country's President B.J. Habibie: "Indonesia should understand that this is only the first step." Mr Cook confirmed that Britain was ready to take part in an international peacekeeping force in East Timor, where the death toll from rampaging militia since the vote for independence has been put at tens of thousands by some aid agencies. Britain's ambassador to the United Nations, Sir Jeremy Greenstock, today described the region as a "living hell". Welcoming a statement by Indonesia's General Wiranto, saying his government might accept an international peacekeeping force, Mr Cook said: "Britain is ready to make its contribution to such a force if we get the green light to send a force in. "In the meantime, it is right that we should bring home to the Indonesian army the horror of the whole world at the brutality they have visited on East Timor." The move came after widespread protest at the shipment of ground attack jets to the region to honor a deal signed by the Conservative government in the 1980s, despite concerns that they were being used against the people of East Timor.

Britain wants to strengthen its investment and trade links with Indonesia, visiting British Deputy Foreign Minister John Battle said in Jakarta on January 18, 2000. "Indonesia has a huge potential market and we want to see a stronger Indonesia emerge to face the challenges of the future," Battle said at a luncheon talk hosted by the British Chamber of Commerce in Indonesia. He said that British businessmen would be reliable partners of Indonesian counterparts as Indonesia is rebuilding its shattered economy. Foreign investors, including those from Britain, need a stable political environment to invest in the country, he added. Britain is the second largest foreign investor in Indonesia, he said, adding that the visit of a high-level business delegation to Jakarta in December 1999 demonstrated its tremendous interest in business opportunities in Indonesia.

Indonesian President Abdurrahman Wahid arrived in Britain on February 1st,2000, for a 24-hour working visit. Wahid is paying the visit "in the light of the close relationship between the two countries, and the recent indication that the United Kingdom is ready to support and be a key partner of the new Indonesia," the Indonesia Embassy in London said in a statement. During the visit, Wahid is scheduled to meet British Prime Minister Tony Blair, Foreign Secretary Robin Cook and other officials. He will also meet members of the British Parliament and attend a business forum organized by British Trade International. Also on the same day, British Foreign Office Minister John Battle, who is in charge of Asian affairs, told BBC radio that Indonesia has been "transformed since holding its first contested presidential elections last year and was now an emerging democracy. Two weeks ago Britain announced it was lifting an arms embargo against Indonesia in line with the European Union. The four-month EU embargo was imposed to put pressure on Jakarta to respect East Timor's vote for independence at a time when the territory was torn by violence. Wahid is in Britain with a team of ministers and businessmen aiming to shore up international backing for Indonesia. Britain's envoy to Indonesia said at the weekend the British government is convinced Indonesia will be able to solve its own internal problems without any foreign intervention. Britain had never doubted Indonesia's capability to settle its own internal problems as Indonesia was a law-abiding country, British Ambassador to Indonesia Richard Gozney said on June 18, 2001. Indonesia already had a constitution in place, so any problem it was facing could be settled through the existing constitutional mechanisms, he noted. He said President Abdurahman Wahid once met British Prime Minister Tony Blair and some of his ministers, and at the meeting, Britain had pledged it would not intervene in Indonesia's internal affairs amid its prolonged economic and confidence crisis. All elements in the Indonesian legislative and executive branches of government as well in the defense and security agencies should unite to resolve the country's problems, he said. Gozney welcomed President Wahid's moves towards democratization of the country's political life, saying it was only through democratic channels that political problems could be settled amicably. He stressed the current heating up of the political situation in Indonesia would not affect the cooperative relations existing between the two countries. Britain had no intention of pulling out its investments from Indonesia, even though the problems foreign businessmen were facing in Indonesia had to do with domestic Indonesian issues, he said.

On August 29, 2001, Britain was ready to resume sales of weapons to Indonesia, saying that it has accepted the assurances from the Indonesian Military (TNI) that these arms would not be used for internal repression, including in Aceh. "The assurances they (TNI) gave us are reliable," visiting Foreign Minister Ben Bradshaw said at a media briefing held at the British Council to wind up his three-day visit. Britain, traditionally a major supplier of military hardware to Indonesia, was in the middle of delivering several of its Hawk jets when the European Union imposed an arms embargo in September 1999 in protest against Jakarta's handling of East Timor. The embargo was lifted in January 2000, allowing Britain to complete the delivery of the remaining six Hawk fighters. Plans for new arms sales to Indonesia have since come under close scrutiny from international non-governmental organizations. While East Timor has become an independent state, Indonesia continues to face insurgency in Aceh and Irian Jaya.

Britain and Indonesia signed an agreement on April 18, 2002, to take joint action to combat the trade in illegal timber products between the two countries. The deal commits Britain to revising its current laws with a view to eliminating imports of timber from illegal sources and obliges Indonesia to open its forestry sector to closer independent scrutiny. Environmental groups estimate that 60 percent of Britain's tropical timber imports are from illegal sources, representing almost 150 million pounds ($210 million) worth of stolen timber. They believe the agreement-signed in London by British Environment Minister Michael Meacher and Indonesian Minister of Forestry Dr. Muhammad Prakosa-is vital to prevent the disappearance of tropical forests within five to 10 years. Friends of the Earth forest campaigner, Ed Matthew, said more than 70 percent of logging in Indonesia was illegal and the contract should help. "For the first time the U.K. (United Kingdom) government has sat down with a country exporting large quantities of timber and agreed on joint action to stop illegal exports and the destruction of primary forests," Matthew said.

To mark Indonesian President Megawati Sukarnoputri's official visit to London, Britain on June 13, 2002, signed a series of agreements with Indonesia to strengthen bilateral relations. Following the signing of the agreements, British Foreign Office Minister Mike O'Brien said the agreements will deepen the cooperation between Britain and Indonesia. "I welcome these agreements which demonstrate a deepening of the UK's relationship with Indonesia and mark a successful visit to the UK by President Megawati," he said in a statement issued after the signing ceremony. Four bilateral agreements were signed on June 13, 2002. One of them was a memorandum of understanding on debt conversion, in which the two sides agreed to build up an existing bilateral debt agreement. They also agreed to exchanges the route schedule, code sharing arrangements and an exchange of traffic rights between the UK and Indonesia in the field of air services. A cultural agreement was also started that "puts in place a framework to continue and enhance cooperation in a wide range of fields from sports to science and technology". They also agreed to cooperate in the fields of health care. There will be a pilot project to recruit Indonesian health professionals into Britain to intensify bilateral exchanges on best practice in health care.

Britain has decided to withdraw non-essential diplomatic personnel from Indonesia, Foreign Secretary Jack Straw said on September 12, 2002. Straw told a press conference in London that he had authorized the withdrawal of non-essential staff and their dependents from the British embassy in Jakarta in the wake of the weekend Bali bombing which killed over 180.

On June 23, 2003, Indonesia's military has begun using British-made Scorpion light tanks during its offensive against separatist rebels in Aceh province. Jakarta Post, which carried a photograph of one of the tanks, said their use in the province could stir renewed controversy with Britain, which reportedly sold them on the understanding they would not be used against separatists. Indonesia on May 19, 2003 launched its biggest military operation for a quarter-century against separatists in the province on Sumatra island. The British embassy declined comment on whether the use of the Scorpions in Aceh violated a sales agreement and referred inquiries to the foreign office in London. Military operation commander Brigadier General Bambang Darmono said the 36 Scorpion tanks would be used to safeguard road transport from rebel ambushes. "Wherever the Scorpions are needed we will deploy them. We will not let Aceh separatist rebels disrupt land transportation," he told reporters. This month a visiting foreign office minister, Mike O'Brien, said future spare parts deals between Britain and Indonesia could be affected if British-made Hawk warplanes were used in Aceh. Britain says it supplied the 24 trainer/fighter planes in 1996 on the understanding they would not be used for offensive operations. It does not want them used during the operation against the Free Aceh Movement separatists in Aceh. Indonesia disputes that any such agreement exists and says the use of the Hawks in Aceh would not, in any case, breach it. Media reports said the military used four Hawks on the first day of its Aceh offensive as close protection for transport planes. They did not mount any attacks.

Tony Blair was due in Indonesia in March 2006 for the first visit by a British prime minister in more than 20 years, highlighting the moderate Islam nation's growing importance to the West. He will meet with President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono. Yudhoyono has invited top Indonesian Muslim leaders to the palace to meet Blair, including Hasyim Muzadi, head of the country's largest Islamic movement Nahdlatul Ulama. Also on the prime minister's agenda is a trip to an Islamic boarding school where he will meet with students, and a meeting with British aid workers who have been assisting in reconstruction work in tsunami-hit Aceh province. Indonesia's ambassador to Britain, Marty Natalegawa, said Jakarta was seeking improved ties in keeping with Britain's appreciation of democratic changes in the country following the fall of autocratic president Suharto in 1998. The challenge for Indonesia was to ensure that this appreciation translates "into concrete manifestations, such as support for the strengthening of our democratic institutions," he said. "We want to say: Indonesia equals democracy. Indonesia equals economic opportunities," he told reporters in Jakarta. Ahead of Blair's arrival about 100 members of the hardline Hizbut Tahrir-a small number by Indonesian protest standards-rallied outside the British embassy condemning the presence of British troops in Iraq and Afghanistan. Shouting "Go to hell, Blair!", the protesters said the British premier and US President George W. Bush were illegally occupying Iraq and murdering Iraqis. "Britain is a cunning imperialist trying to destroy Islam. They should not toy with Islam and Muslims across the world," a protest leader shouted from a loudspeaker.

PS-SOURCES: http://www.fsmitha.com/h2/ch23t.htm (accessed November 26, 2008), Associated Press April 11, 1985; January 4, 1994; April 18, 2002; March 30, 2006; BBC February 2, 1982; February 3, 1982; February 17, 1982; January 11, 1993; The Times October 31, 1985; January 3, 1995; Xinhua April 11, 1985; January 18, 2000; February 1, 2000; June 13, 2002; The Guardian July 11, 1985; Agence France Presse December 2, 1993; February 24, 1994; November 19, 1994; October 17, 2002; June 23, 2003; March 29, 2006; Japan Economic Newswire October 12, 1994; Straits Times July 2, 1997; Jakarta Post August 29, 2001; Asia Pulse June 18, 2001; Deutsche Presse-Agentur August 28, 1997; AAP Newsfeed August 29, 1997; 


MARITIME-MIDS:

MARITIME-DISPUTE:

Discussion:

SOURCES: Gibler, D. M., S. V. Miller, and E. K. Little. 2016. "An Analysis of the Militarized Interstate Dispute (MID) Dataset, 1816-2001." International Studies Quarterly. 60 (4): 719-730.
Gibler, D.M. 2018. Militarized Interstate Dispute Narratives, 1816-2010. Langham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. 
