FILE: cm235345v11.0.txt
DYAD: PORTUGAL-YUGOSLAVIA
RIVALRY: RIV10635 ISOLATED
DISPUTE(S): MID4137 MID4186 MID4343 

RIVNOTES: 
RIV635: MID4186, this MID has been broken up into two MID4186 & MID4343 because the incidents were more than 6 months apart in mid3.02

RIV10635 is coded isolated because all MIDs relate to the Kosovo War and NATO action.

PSNOTES:

PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20180216
PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20180216

Territorial-Maritime-Boundary Issues Variables

MID4137 

TERRMID: MID4137 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID4137 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID4137 from cm narrative, this is the Kosovo conflict, February 1998-June 1999. Fighting erupted in Kosovo between ethnic Albanians and Serbs, and Serbian President Milosevic sent troops to fight inside Kosovo. UN/NATO militarily intervened to stop the violence, triggering their involvement in this MID. Coded third party link to territory because Kosovo had declared independence, but Serbia did not recognize them and declared Kosovo as part of its territory in the interest of "protecting" the ethnic Serbs there. 

MARITMID: MID4137 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID4137 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4137 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID4137 the Yugoslavian War involved extensive fighting between insurgent groups organized along ethnic lines, and these groups sometimes fought against states as well. Here, ethnic Albanians fought inside Serbia/Yugoslavia over Serbia's aggression toward ethnic Albanians in Kosovo. Coded civil war MID because this MID involved insurgents fighting inside Serbia/Yugoslavia against Serbian guerrillas.

CIVWARLINK: MID4137 1 -- civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID4137 coded civil war link because this MID involved ethnic insurgents fighting inside Kosovo, outside of this dyad. Serbian guerrillas and troops fought Albanian guerrillas within Kosovo. 

COUPMID: MID4137 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4137 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID4186 

TERRMID: MID4186 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID4186 1 -- third party link to territorial MID 
TERRLINK-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID4186 from cm narrative, this is one of two MIDs connected to Yugoslavia's withdrawal from Kosovo and the lingering hostilities between Yugoslavia and UN/NATO forces. Clashes occurred as Milosevic was attempting to hold onto power in Serbia. Coded third party link to territory because Kosovo was partially territorial in nature, as Yugoslavia did not recognize its independence and claimed its territory as its own due to ethnic Serbs. UN/NATO countries' military intervention in Kosovo pulls them into this MID. 

MARITMID: MID4186 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID4186 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4186 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID4186 the Yugoslavian War involved extensive fighting between insurgent groups organized along ethnic lines, and these groups sometimes fought against states as well. Here, ethnic Albanians fought inside Serbia/Yugoslavia over Serbia's aggression toward ethnic Albanians in Kosovo. Coded civil war MID because this MID involved insurgents fighting inside Serbia/Yugoslavia against Serbian guerrillas.

CIVWARLINK: MID4186 1 -- civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID4186 coded civil war link because this MID involved ethnic Albanian and Serb guerrillas fighting inside Kosovo, outside of this dyad.

COUPMID: MID4186 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4186 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID4343 

TERRMID: MID4343 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID4343 1 -- third party link to territorial MID 
TERRLINK-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID4343 from cm narrative, this is one of two MIDs connected to Yugoslavia's withdrawal from Kosovo and the lingering hostilities between Yugoslavia and UN/NATO forces. These MIDs are coded separately due to the temporal separation between them. Clashes occurred as Milosevic was attempting to hold onto power in Serbia. Coded third party link to territory because Kosovo was partially territorial in nature, as Yugoslavia did not recognize its independence and claimed its territory as its own due to ethnic Serbs. UN/NATO countries' military intervention in Kosovo pulls them into this MID. 

MARITMID: MID4343 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID4343 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4343 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID4343 the Yugoslavian War involved extensive fighting between insurgent groups organized along ethnic lines, and these groups sometimes fought against states as well. Here, ethnic Albanians fought inside Serbia/Yugoslavia over Serbia's aggression toward ethnic Albanians in Kosovo. Coded civil war MID because this MID involved insurgents fighting inside Serbia/Yugoslavia against Serbian guerrillas.

CIVWARLINK: MID4343 1 -- civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID4343 coded civil war link because this MID involved ethnic Albanian and Serb guerrillas fighting inside Kosovo, outside of this dyad.

COUPMID: MID4343 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4343 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

NARRATIVE-CM:

SOURCES-CM:

NARRATIVE-CR:
This rivalry is a product of the Portuguese membership in NATO. This factor is also at work in the rivalry between Portugal and Yugoslavia.

MID3551 In response to Yugoslav involvement in Bosnian civil war, Western countries first showed force and then began a blockade against Yugoslavia. On 7/16/1992 there was a show of force by USA, UK, Belgium, France, Germany, Greece, Turkey, Spain, Portugal and Italy.

The disputes between Portugal and Yugoslavia all take place in conjunction with NATO action towards Yugoslavia regarding its policy and action towards Kosovo. As a member of NATO, Portugal participated in these joint operations designed to prevent Yugoslavia from operations directed at Albanian Kosovars and the Kosovo Liberation Army. 

Sporadic fighting between ethnic Albanian guerrillas and Serbian police in the Serbian province of Kosovo in southern Yugoslavia escalated to a high-profile conflict in early March 1998 when Serbian police and paramilitary forces began blasting ethnic Albanian villages in the area surrounding the capital, Pristina, killing dozens of defenseless residents. Fearing the possibility of another full-scale Balkan war, the "Contact Group" (consisting of the United States, Britain, France, Germany, Italy, and Russia) set up to monitor adherence to the Dayton Accords of 1995, which ended the Bosnian Civil War of 1992-95, imposed an arms embargo on Yugoslavia on May 9. Alone among Contact Group members, the US favored harsher penalties against the Serbs; in the meantime it was discovered that the Russians had agreed to sell arms to Yugoslavia the previous December, in violation of the Dayton Accords. The province of Kosovo, 90 percent of whose 2 million inhabitants are ethnic Albanians, had been stripped in 1989 of its autonomous status within the republic of Serbia by then-president of Serbia, Slobodan Milosevic in reaction to the province's demand for independence. In the following years a movement of peaceful civil resistance among the Kosovars (ethnic Albanians in Kosovo) led by moderate Ibrahim Rugova had achieved a certain degree of success by boycotting Serbian administrative institutions. Rather than compromise by offering Kosovo the status of an autonomous republic within the state of Yugoslavia-the status of Serbia and Montenegro-Milosevic, who subsequently became president of Yugoslavia, persisted in a policy of police rule in Kosovo. The police sweeps of March 1998, an action diplomats considered a foolish move, merely served to galvanize resistance among the vast Albanian majority. As Serbian forces continued to shell villages, the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), which began as a small band of poorly equipped men but quickly swelled with volunteers and arms supplied by Albania, gained control of 40 percent of the province. In early June, Milosevic stepped up his campaign of flushing the Kosovars from their homes, causing thousands of refugees to flee for their lives to Albania. Meanwhile US efforts to help settle the conflict failed, and Contact Group members continued to disagree about sanctions. In August 1998, a Serbian offensive drove KLA rebels from their strongholds, and fighting centered on escape routes into Albania, where Kosovars maintained sanctuaries; both sides reviewed a blueprint for peace negotiations. Serbian terrorism against villagers brought UN condemnation. Clashes between Serbian security forces and rebels (as well as civilians) resulted in about 50 killings in December 1998, adding urgency to efforts by the Contact Group members to negotiate a permanent peace. The warring sides sent delegations to peace talks in Rambouillet, France, in February 1999. Serb forces continued attacks on Kosovo Albanians, while Belgrade fortified its border with Macedonia (the likely staging area for any NATO peacekeeping force). US envoy Richard C. A. Holbrooke, architect of the Dayton Accords, unsuccessfully tried to persuade Milosevic to sign onto a US-sponsored peace plan (March 10, 1999), and NATO began a strategic bombing campaign on March 24. More than 2,000 people died and 300,000 have been displace during the fighting. 

MID4137 In response to Yugoslav military activity in the bordering Kosovo region, Albania, followed by other nations, took military action against Yugoslavia. Albania began by fortifying its border with Yugoslavia, and engaged in numerous subsequent incidents with Yugoslavia over its stance toward ethnic Albanians in Kosovo. Beginning in mid-1998, NATO states began conducting military exercises and other shows of force and began to threaten Yugoslavia with air strikes if it did not change its Kosovo policy. Yugoslavia responded with mobilizations and other militarized actions. From 3/24/99, NATO countries began carrying out air strikes against Yugoslavia, which acceded to NATO demands to leave Kosovo in early June 1999. NATO bombings ceased on 6/10/99.

MID4186 This dispute deals with the relationship between NATO and Yugoslavia. At this time KFOR was patrolling the border between Kosovo and Yugoslavia, but a number of rebels from Kosovo were continuing to infiltrate into Yugoslavia and attack Serb police officers. Yugoslavia originally moved forces to the border to counter the actions by the Kosovars and this was met with a NATO threat. 

MID4343 This dispute is linked to 4186. It also deals with the relationship between NATO and Yugoslavia. During this period KFOR continued to patrol the border between Kosovo and Yugoslavia. A number of rebels from Kosovo continued to infiltrate into Yugoslavia and attack Serb police officers. Yugoslavia moved tanks to the Kosovar border in an effort to crack down on Albanians crossing the border to attack Serb police. 

SOURCES-CR:
Dispute Narratives-MID 3.0 dataset Correlates of War 2 project http://cow2.la.psu.edu; New York Times 11/27/2000; OnWar.com.

PS-NARRATIVE:

19459999-19920715 0.5

Portugal was a Fascist autocracy until the Carnation Revolution. On April 25, 1974, the Revolution started and a change to a democratic government followed. The relations between Portugal and Yugoslavia were most likely negative to inexistent in the period after World War II and until the change to democracy of Portugal. Yugoslavia had very bad relations with Spain under Franco's Fascist regime, and one would assume with Portugal, too, during the same period. 

On April 25, 1974, the Portuguese Carnation Revolution started and Portugal changed from an autocratic fascist government to a democratic one. This signaled the possibility of improved relations between Portugal and Yugoslavia.

On May 18, 1979, at the end of the visit to Yugoslavia by the Portuguese Minister of Agriculture it was stated that economic co-operation between Vojvodina and Portugal can be considerably expanded and promoted. Portugal is a major importer of Vojvodina's staple exports-meat and meat products, edible oil and sugar.

A new two-year program of cultural and educational co-operation between Yugoslavia and Portugal was concluded in Belgrade on 22nd June, 1979. Among other things a Portuguese-language instructor's office will open at the faculty of philosophy at Zagreb University in the next academic year and at the same time possibilities will be considered for opening a Serbo-Croat-language instructor's office in Coimbra.

Gen Antonio Ramalho Eanes, the President of the Republic of Portugal, arrived to Belgrade for an official and friendly visit to Yugoslavia on 25th June, 1979 at the invitation of the President of the Republic Josip Broz Tito. Although Yugoslav-Portuguese relations have not been established for long, the co-operation between the two countries was constantly increasing, and is marked by close or identical views on many issues of international policy, and by the mutual wish to continue to work on the promotion of bilateral co-operation as well as to exchange views even more frequently on topical international problems. The visit of the Portuguese President Gen Eanes as well as the talks which he will hold with President Tito represent a reliable indication that Yugoslav-Portuguese relations were developing favorably, and that they were based on friendship and mutual understanding.

Portugal is very interested in all the actions taken by President Tito and Yugoslavia within the framework of the non-aligned movement in the international sphere, particularly in Yugoslav assessments of international events. Portugal is interested in being represented, in the capacity of an invited guest, at the sixth summit of the non-aligned countries in Havana and this shows, though Portugal's international position is a specific one, that actions taken by non-aligned countries in the sphere of international relations are close to it. 

On April 2, 1982, the Yugoslav President Sergej Kraigher left Lisbon after a two-day visit to Portugal. His discussions with Portuguese President Ramalho Eanes and Prime Minister Pinto Balsemao were focused on the international situation, the non-aligned movement, Africa and bilateral relations between the two countries. President Kraigher expressed his appreciation of Portugal's support to the non-aligned movement at the welcoming banquet given in his honor." Although Yugoslavia and Portugal have different political systems," he said, "they both face the same problems in their national development. Common interests have kept them in close contacts."

The Portuguese government is opposed to forming a European military force to put an end to the virtual civil war in Yugoslavia, Foreign Minister Joao de Deus Pinheiro said on September 18, 1991. Instead he favors a solution by the United Nations to bring a halt to the war being waged between Serbs and Croats, which threatens to spread to the remaining four federated Yugoslav republics. The government's declaration comes at a moment when speculation has been appearing in the Portuguese media. Newspapers citing "reliable sources who have requested anonymity" reported that Portuguese parachute commandos may join a European Community (EC) peace force deployed to separate the warring parties. However, Portugal is a member of the European Community (EC), the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the Western European Union (WEU). For this reason Deus Pinheiro explained that his declaration does not mean that Portugal "takes a formal and definitive position against a force of interposition." The government's note was interpreted here in Lisbon as an act of alignment with Washington and London preceding the debates of the next few days in the Portuguese Parliament, when the principal objectors to direct European intervention in Yugoslavia will be stating their position. Portugal's 13-year colonial war in Africa (1961-74), waged by an expeditionary force of some 220,000 men at the cost of 20,000 lives has turned most Portuguese public opinion against foreign military operations, say analysts.

Portugal's foreign minister and Lord Carrington, the European Community's (EC) envoy to Yugoslavia, will visit the splintering nation on April 22, 1992, Portugal's premier announced. Portuguese Prime Minister Anibal Cavaco Silva said the situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina, where Serbian-led fighting has left more than 200 dead, was "one of the major worries of the community." In addition to the 200 dead, more than 1,000 are missing in violence in Bosnia-Herzegovina which has accompanied the republic's recognition as an independent state earlier this month. Noting that the EC had been trying to broker a ceasefire, Cavaco Silva said that Portuguese Foreign Minister Joao de Deus Pinheiro and Lord Carrington were travelling to Yugoslavia "so we have contact with all parties involved." 

The first MID of RIV10635, MID3551 was in response to Yugoslav involvement in Bosnian civil war. Western countries first showed force and then began a blockade against Yugoslavia. On 7/16/1992 there was a show of force by USA, UK, Belgium, France, Germany, Greece, Turkey, Spain, Portugal and Italy. MID3551 started on July 15, 1992.

20001129-20159999 0.5

The last MID of RIV10635, MID4343 ended on November 29, 2000. This dispute is linked to MID4186. It also deals with the relationship between NATO and Yugoslavia. During this period KFOR continued to patrol the border between Kosovo and Yugoslavia. A number of rebels from Kosovo continued to infiltrate into Yugoslavia and attack Serb police officers. Yugoslavia moved tanks to the Kosovar border in an effort to crack down on Albanians crossing the border to attack Serb police. 

In January 2001, Portugal has been carrying out political and diplomatic initiatives in order to develop Yugoslav military cooperation with NATO, namely Partnership for Peace (PfP) projects, Diario de Noticias was told. However, the leadership of the new OSCE Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe delegation in Belgrade which Portugal aspired to, was instead given to Italy. Portuguese Foreign Minister Jaime Gama and Defence Minister Julio Castro Caldas have been leading the political and diplomatic initiatives carried out by Lisbon since the end of last year aimed at conveying NATO countries' will to be more open to Yugoslavia and their will to participate in the process of development and stability of that country.

The role of Yugoslavia in military cooperation projects with NATO, namely in PfP projects, was discussed by Defence Minister Julio Castro Caldas in December 2000, during a short trip to Belgrade, when the minister visited the Portuguese troops in Kosovo and Bosnia. Castro Caldas, who entered the territory through the "correct door" before visiting Kosovo (Yugoslav province), something which was made possible due to a change in the country's leadership, was received in Belgrade by the federal Prime Minister and by his Defence counterpart, who gave him signs of wishing to participate in NATO's cooperation programs. Belgrade had already delivered the same message to a member of the Greek government a few days earlier. This issue will also be discussed during a visit of Portuguese Foreign Minister Jaime Gama to Belgrade in the second half of February 2001.

Portuguese Foreign Minister Jaime Jose Matos da Gama welcomed Yugoslavia's imminent full membership in the Council of Europe CoE in talks with Yugoslav counterpart Goran Svilanovic in Lisbon on 12 December, 2001. Matos da Gama and Svilanovic, who is on a working visit to Lisbon, exchanged views on the process of the harmonization of relations between Yugoslavia and the EU, the Federal Foreign Ministry said. The ministers also expressed full solidarity in the common struggle against international terrorism and underscored the need to create conditions for full respect of UN Security Council Resolution 1244 and the safe return and living conditions for all national and ethnic groups in Kosovo-Metohija province. The Portuguese side voiced support for Yugoslav government efforts to overcome the current crisis in the Yugoslav federation. Intensification of political dialogue between Yugoslavia and Portugal and promotion of all forms of bilateral cooperation were also discussed.

Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic will be paying an official visit to Portugal on 3 November, 2003. The Lisbon talks will focus on Serbia-Montenegro's EU integration and the development of bilateral relations between the two countries, Marovic's office reports. The statement says that Marovic has been invited to visit Portugal by the country's President Jorge Fernando Branco de Sampaio. Apart from Sampaio, the state union president is expected to hold talks with Portuguese Prime Minister Jose Manuel Durao Barroso and Speaker Joao Bosco Soares Mota Amaral.

Serbia-Montenegro Defense Minister Prvoslav Davinic said on July 25, 2005, that his country and Portugal have agreed to promote military cooperation, including establishing cooperation between defense ministries, armies and military industries. After talks with his Portuguese counterpart Luis Amado, Davinic said that an agreement on the two ministries' cooperation was a "new step" in cooperation and strengthening of good relations. He said that the second area referred to the two armies' cooperation, since Portugal as a NATO member can present useful suggestions and experiences for the membership of Serbia-Montenegro armed forces in the Partnership for Peace. "There should be an exchange of the two countries' delegations at the military industry level, which would then discuss further forms of military cooperation and trade in this important branch of the economy both for us and for Portugal," said Davinic. Serbia-Montenegro has desired to join the European Union and NATO, but its path to Euro-Atlantic integrations is troubled by internal strifes and unfulfilled obligations to The Hague international tribunal. Portuguese Defense Minister Luis Amado said that the agreement between the two defense ministries represented the same agreement which his country had signed with states that wanted to join the European Union, Partnership for Peace and NATO. The agreement is a framework for cooperation among military staff in order to take one step forward and facilitate Serbia-Montenegro's entry in the Euro-Atlantic integrations, Amado said.

PS-SOURCES: BBC May 21, 1979; June 25, 1979; June 26, 1979; January 20, 1981; July 14, 1984; January 19, 2001; December 12, 2001; October 30, 2003; Xinhua April 2, 1982; July 25, 2005; IPS September 18, 1991; Agence France Presse April 22, 1992

MARITIME-MIDS:

MARITIME-DISPUTE:

Discussion:
