FILE: cm290345v11.0.txt
DYAD: POLAND-YUGOSLAVIA
RIVALRY: RIV761 ISOLATED
DISPUTE(S): MID4137 MID4186 MID4343 

PS-NOTES:

PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20170809
PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20170809

Territorial-Maritime-Boundary Issues Variables 

MID4137 

TERRMID: MID4137 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID4137 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID4137 from cm narrative, this is the Kosovo conflict, February 1998-June 1999. Fighting erupted in Kosovo between ethnic Albanians and Serbs, and Serbian President Milosevic sent troops to fight inside Kosovo. UN/NATO militarily intervened to stop the violence, triggering their involvement in this MID. Coded third party link to territory because Kosovo had declared independence, but Serbia did not recognize them and declared Kosovo as part of its territory in the interest of "protecting" the ethnic Serbs there. Poland is pulled into this MID as a part of UN forces. 

MARITMID: MID4137 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID4137 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4137 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID4137 the Yugoslavian War involved extensive fighting between insurgent groups organized along ethnic lines, and these groups sometimes fought against states as well. Here, ethnic Albanians fought inside Serbia/Yugoslavia over Serbia's aggression toward ethnic Albanians in Kosovo. Coded civil war MID because this MID involved insurgents fighting inside Serbia/Yugoslavia against Serbian guerrillas.

CIVWARLINK: MID4137 1 -- civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID4137 coded civil war link because this MID involved ethnic insurgents fighting inside Kosovo, outside of this dyad. Serbian guerrillas and troops fought Albanian guerrillas within Kosovo. 

COUPMID: MID4137 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4137 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID4186 

TERRMID: MID4186 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID4186 1 -- third party link to territorial MID 
TERRLINK-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID4186 from cm narrative, this is one of two MIDs connected to Yugoslavia's withdrawal from Kosovo and the lingering hostilities between Yugoslavia and UN/NATO forces. Clashes occurred as Milosevic was attempting to hold onto power in Serbia. Coded third party link to territory because Kosovo was partially territorial in nature, as Yugoslavia did not recognize its independence and claimed its territory as its own due to ethnic Serbs. UN/NATO countries' military intervention in Kosovo pulls them into this MID. 

MARITMID: MID4186 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID4186 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4186 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID4186 the Yugoslavian War involved extensive fighting between insurgent groups organized along ethnic lines, and these groups sometimes fought against states as well. Here, ethnic Albanians fought inside Serbia/Yugoslavia over Serbia's aggression toward ethnic Albanians in Kosovo. Coded civil war MID because this MID involved insurgents fighting inside Serbia/Yugoslavia against Serbian guerrillas.

CIVWARLINK: MID4186 1 -- civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID4186 coded civil war link because this MID involved ethnic Albanian and Serb guerrillas fighting inside Kosovo, outside of this dyad.

COUPMID: MID4186 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4186 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID4343 

TERRMID: MID4343 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID4343 1 -- third party link to territorial MID 
TERRLINK-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID4343 from cm narrative, this is one of two MIDs connected to Yugoslavia's withdrawal from Kosovo and the lingering hostilities between Yugoslavia and UN/NATO forces. These MIDs are coded separately due to the temporal separation between them. Clashes occurred as Milosevic was attempting to hold onto power in Serbia. Coded third party link to territory because Kosovo was partially territorial in nature, as Yugoslavia did not recognize its independence and claimed its territory as its own due to ethnic Serbs. UN/NATO countries' military intervention in Kosovo pulls them into this MID. 

MARITMID: MID4343 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID4343 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4343 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID4343 the Yugoslavian War involved extensive fighting between insurgent groups organized along ethnic lines, and these groups sometimes fought against states as well. Here, ethnic Albanians fought inside Serbia/Yugoslavia over Serbia's aggression toward ethnic Albanians in Kosovo. Coded civil war MID because this MID involved insurgents fighting inside Serbia/Yugoslavia against Serbian guerillas.

CIVWARLINK: MID4343 1 -- civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID4343 coded civil war link because this MID involved ethnic Albanian and Serb guerrillas fighting inside Kosovo, outside of this dyad.

COUPMID: MID4343 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4343 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID3 1993-2001:

MID4137
rivalry=290345 nationa=POLAND nationb=YUGOSLAVIA-SERBIA MID4137 19980309-19990320 
 revtype1a=POLICY revtype2a=NOT APPLICABLE fatala=NONE fatalpa=0 lhosta=DISPLAY OF FORCE 
 revtype1b=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2b=NOT APPLICABLE fatalb=501-999 DEATHS
fatalpb=. lhostb=USE OF FORCE 

In response to Yugoslav military activity in the bordering Kosovo region, Albania, followed by other nations, took military action against Yugoslavia. Albania began by fortifying its border with Yugoslavia, and engaged in numerous subsequent incidents with Yugoslavia over its stance toward ethnic Albanians in Kosovo. Beginning in mid-1998, NATO states began conducting military exercises and other shows of force and began to threaten Yugoslavia with airstrikes if it did not change its Kosovo policy. Yugoslavia responded with mobilizations and other militarized actions. From 3/24/99, NATO countries began carrying out airstrikes against Yugoslavia, which acceded to NATO demands to leave Kosovo in early June 1999. NATO bombings ceased on 6/10/99. First day of dispute was on 3/9/1998 and last day of dispute was on 3/20/1999.

MID4186
rivalry=290345 nationa=POLAND nationb=YUGOSLAVIA-SERBIA MID4186 20000221-20000403 
 revtype1a=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2a=NOT APPLICABLE fatala=NONE fatalpa=0 lhosta=DISPLAY OF FORCE 
 revtype1b=POLICY revtype2b=NOT APPLICABLE fatalb=NONE fatalpb=0
lhostb=DISPLAY OF FORCE 

This dispute deals with the relationship between NATO and Yugoslavia. At this time KFOR was patrolling the border between Kosovo and Yugoslavia, but a number of rebels from Kosovo were continuing to infiltrate into Yugoslavia and attack Serb police officers. Yugoslavia originally moved forces to the border to counter the actions by the Kosovars and this was met with a NATO threat. First day of dispute was on 2/21/2000 and last day of dispute was on 4/3/2000.

MID4343
rivalry=290345 nationa=YUGOSLAVIA-SERBIA nationb=POLAND MID4343 20001124-20001128 
 revtype1a=POLICY revtype2a=NOT APPLICABLE fatala=NONE fatalpa=0 lhosta=DISPLAY OF FORCE 
 revtype1b=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2b=NOT APPLICABLE fatalb=NONE fatalpb=0
lhostb=NO MILITARIZED ACTION 

First day of dispute was on 11/24/2000 and last day of dispute was on 11/28/2000.

RIVNOTES: 
RIV761 is considered an isolated rivalry because all the MIDs are part of one war.
RIV761: MID4186, this MID has been broken up into two MID4186 & MID4343 because the incidents were more than 6 months apart in mid3.02

NARRATIVE-CM:

SOURCES-CM:

NARRATIVE-CR:
MID4137 In response to Yugoslav military activity in the bordering Kosovo region, Albania, followed by other nations, took military action against Yugoslavia. Albania began by fortifying its border with Yugoslavia, and engaged in numerous subsequent incidents with Yugoslavia over its stance toward ethnic Albanians in Kosovo. Beginning in mid-1998, NATO states began conducting military exercises and other shows of force and began to threaten Yugoslavia with airstrikes if it did not change its Kosovo policy. Yugoslavia responded with mobilizations and other militarized actions. From 3/24/99, NATO countries began carrying out airstrikes against Yugoslavia, which acceded to NATO demands to leave Kosovo in early June 1999. NATO bombings ceased on 6/10/99.

MID4186 This dispute deals with the relationship between NATO and Yugoslavia. At this time KFOR was patrolling the border between Kosovo and Yugoslavia, but a number of rebels from Kosovo were continuing to infiltrate into Yugoslavia and attack Serb police officers. Yugoslavia originally moved forces to the border to counter the actions by the Kosovars and this was met with a NATO threat. 

SOURCES-CR:

PS-NARRATIVE: 

19459999-19980308 0.5

After World War II Yugoslavia provided help to Poland's reconstruction, mainly through shipments of grains. President of Poland, Boleslaw Beirut, made an official visit to Yugoslavia in October 1946. They reciprocated Tito's official visit to Poland which occurred in March 1946. On July 6th, 1949, Poland decided to reduce trade with Tito's Yugoslavia, following a Communist Eastern European boycott of Yugoslavia. On October 1st, 1949, Poland renounced its treaty of friendship and alliance with Yugoslavia. On November 15, 1955, Poland announced a trade agreement with Yugoslavia. The value of the projected trade was put at 281 million USD. On February 21st, 1958, Poland and Yugoslavia signed an economic cooperation agreement that pointedly underlined the political sympathies between the two governments. The agreement asks for the establishment of a permanent Polish-Yugoslav cooperation committee to promote industrial specialization and increase commercial exchanges. According to the Yugoslav Vice-President, these are the widest trade relations with another country, Yugoslavia ever had. This agreement came in the aftermath of the September 1957 official visit to Belgrade of the Polish leader Wladyslaw Gomulka. 

On October 25th, 1971, Poland and Yugoslavia reported that they have reached agreement on 20% annual increase in trade after a 4-day visit to Yugoslavia by Polish Premier Jaroszewiez. The trade prediction for the 1971-1975 period will reach $850-million and the two countries also agreed to major increases in scientific coordination. 

On June 23, 1972, Tito ended an official visit to Poland during which the two countries signed a consular treaty allowing for the opening of a Polish Consulate in Zagreb and they also signed a commercial agreement which should increase trade between the two countries by 25%. The total trade between the two countries previously estimated at US$ 850 million will now reach US $ 1 billion for the 5 year period ending in 1975. The Polish Government spokesman, W. Janiurek indicated that even though there are political differences between the two countries this are not an impediment for the development of bilateral relations. 

On April 25, 1979, Poland and Yugoslavia signed a protocol on scientific and technological cooperation in the fields of power, nuclear and lignite energy. The program of cooperation for 1979-1980 covers such fields as designing and production of equipment for opencast mines and cooperation in the production of spare parts for thermal power plants. The protocol provides for joint scientific and research work and exchange of services, specialists and information. It was signed by polish minister of power and nuclear energy Andrzej Szozda and chairman of the federal committee for energy and industry of Yugoslavia Stojan Matkaliev.

On May 12, 1979, Amil Wojtaszek, Poland's Foreign Minister said on an official visit to Belgrade that Polish-Yugoslav contacts were useful for both Socialist states and strengthened their solidarity and co-operation in the joint struggle for peace, progress and a world without wars. In union with the USSR and the other countries of the socialist community and with the forces of peace and progress in the world, Poland took an active part in the historic process of the struggle for the peace and security of nations. The 40th anniversary of the Hitlerite aggression against Poland reminds us and the whole world, the Polish Foreign Minister continued, of the tragic experiences and brutality which fascism inflicted on the peoples of Europe. The peoples of Poland and Yugoslavia made an enormous contribution to the allied victory and paid the greatest price for it. Nevertheless, the decisive contribution to the victory over fascism and the greatest sacrifices were made by the Soviet Union. 

In the whole 35 years of its existence, people's Poland had considered the main task of the international community to be the contribution to joint efforts aimed at strengthening peace and security in the world and developing useful international co-operation. It was able to note with deep satisfaction that in its own efforts to that end it had been able to count on co-operation with Socialist Yugoslavia.

Josip Vrhovec, Yugoslav Federal Secretary for Foreign Affairs, arrived in Poland on 28th July, 1980, for a three-day official visit at the invitation of Foreign Minister Emil Wojtaszek. They will discuss the further expansion of the two countries' successful co-operation as well as topical international issues Warsaw home service 1300 gmt 28 Jul 80. Vrhovec is accompanied by Roland Strelec, head of department in the Federal Secretariat for Foreign Affairs; Milutin Civic, special counsellor in the Federal Secretariat; Murat Agrovic, chief de cabinet of the Federal Secretary, and other officials. 

Like previous Polish-Yugoslav meetings, the present visit testifies to the all-round and favorable development of the friendly co-operation between both countries. The visit will doubtless contribute to further upgrading and expansion of co-operation in the interests of the peoples of Poland and Yugoslavia, peace and security. At the Warsaw Okecie airport, Josip Vrhovec was greeted by Emil Wojtaszek. Later, the Yugoslav guest laid a wreath at he Tomb of the Unknown Soldier. In the afternoon, the Polish-Yugoslav plenary talks, conducted by Emil Wojtaszek and Josip Vrhovec, began. They were preceded by a meeting between both ministers.

During the plenary talks, both ministers reviewed key problems of the current complicated international situation. They discussed both countries' activity aimed at halting the arms race, consolidating detente and strengthening peace. In this context, much attention was paid to the role Poland and Yugoslavia play in developing international co-operation, especially in Europe. The ministers also analysed the preparations for the Madrid meeting and discussed questions connected with convening a European conference on military detente and disarmament. They also discussed other international issues. Bilateral relations will be reviewed during the plenary talks scheduled for 29th July, 1980.

A 1981 trade protocol for mutual supply of goods was concluded between Poland and Yugoslavia on December 7th, 1980. Under the protocol, two countries will increase the exchange of goods and promote cooperation in production and among specialized departments. Poland will export to Yugoslavia power plants, chemical industry equipment, sulphur and hard coal and import from it raw materials and equipment for chemical industry, food and light industrial products including knit wear, piece goods, and shoes. A big proportion of the mutual supplied goods will be metallurgical products.

Yugoslavia always sticks to its consistent principled stand to oppose any outside intervention in Poland, said Yugoslav parliament leader, Markovic on March 27, 1981. Markovic was briefing newsmen on the development of Yugoslavia's domestic affairs. when asked to comment on the situation in Poland and the possibility of Soviet armed intervention, he said, "i can't say what will happen and when. But Yugoslavia's position is consistent and clear, that is, we are opposed to any kind of outside intervention." He added that Yugoslavia firmly believes that the Polish people will be able to find a way to solve their own problems and overcome difficulties.

Jozef Czyrek, the Polish Foreign Minister, arrived on an official and friendly visit to Yugoslavia on 28th June, 1981. He was welcomed at Belgrade airport by Milorad Pesic, Yugoslav Deputy Federal Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Sava Obradovic, Assistant Federal Secretary for Foreign Affairs, and other officials. The talks between Josip Vrhovec, Yugoslavia's Federal Secretary for Foreign Affairs, and Czyrek began in Belgrade in the morning of 29th June. Expressing mutual satisfaction at the development of the traditionally good relations of co-operation and friendship between the two countries, the ministers devoted this first part of their official talks to a broad exchange of views on topical international issues. The talks took place in a very cordial and friendly atmosphere. Both ministers stressed their governments' readiness to contribute to a successful outcome of the Madrid meeting and a consolidation of the Helsinki spirit.

During the final part of their talks, in the afternoon of 29th June, 1981, the development of economic co-operation was assessed as particularly positive. Higher forms of that co-operation now account for 30% of total Yugoslav-Polish exchanges. Vrhovec informed Czyrek of Yugoslav activity in the field of foreign affairs, particularly as regards the development of relations with neighbouring countries. Czyrek spoke of the preparations for the forthcoming PZPR Congress and the implementation of the decisions of the 11th Plenary Session of the PZPR Central Committee. Following the meeting, Vrhovec gave a formal dinner for Jozef Czyrek and his wife in the Palace of the Federation. He proposed a toast in which he declared that the peoples of the two countries had made immense sacrifices in the last war, fighting not only for their freedom but their very survival. This was an encouragement to them today to devote themselves just as strenuously to the cause of freedom and independence. Those who experienced the terrors of war and conquest know best how important it is to fight for peace and justice. Vrhovec went on to say that Yugoslavia advocated, together with other non-aligned and neutral countries, the so-called Helsinki concept of Europe. This meant that further attempts must be made to prevent an exacerbation of the tension between the two blocs. Action must be taken to overcome the world's division into blocs, and for this reason Yugoslavia attached great significance to a successful outcome of the Madrid meeting. Replying to his host, Jozef Czyrek spoke of the traditions of the struggle for freedom which linked the two peoples and of their joint efforts to help consolidate international security, peace and progress. Yugoslavia and Poland had special reasons for wishing to make the order established in Europe last and to work for enduring European security and world peace. He continued by saying that Poland was experiencing an exceptionally difficult period. At the same time, certain forces in the West were seeking to exploit the events in Poland for their own ends-to discredit socialism, destabilize the situation in Poland and escalate the arms race. Polish communists and the Polish working people were aware of the dangers stemming from this for the postwar peaceful order in Europe, established at such a high price. However, all actions aimed at destroying the foundations of the socialist system in Poland, at weakening the ties of alliance between Poland and the Soviet Union are bound to fail. In resolving her problems, Poland esteems highly the understanding and assistance of her socialist friends. ''We understand their worry and concern at the direction of events in Poland. This is our common worry, and not only for the fate of socialism but also for our common security.'' It was in this sense that Poland understood the letter from the CPSU Central Committee, noting in it sincere concern and a desire to help. The Ninth PZPR Congress will establish a programme for overcoming the current difficulties and securing conditions for the further socialist development of Poland. It will confirm Poland's international position as a member of the Warsaw Treaty and and important factor for peace and stability in Europe. As for relations with Yugoslavia, Poland will continue to maintain the ''all-round friendly ties'' and to cherish the recollections of brotherhood, respect and solidarity which link her to Yugoslavia.

On 30th June, 1981, Sergej Kraigher, President of the SFRY Presidency, received Jozef Czyrek and had a long cordial and friendly conversation with him. The Polish Foreign Minister conveyed warm greetings from Henryk Jablonski, President of the Polish State Council. Czyrek spoke of the results of the 11th Plenum of the PZPR Central Committee and the further process of socialist renewal in Poland, as well as of the international aspects of the Polish situation.

President of the Federal Executive Council Milka Planinc arrived in Poland on 3rd July, 1984. She was welcomed at Warsaw airport by Premier Wojciech Jaruzelski, Deputy Premiers Zbigniew Messner and Janusz Obodowski, Foreign Minister Stefan Olszowski and Foreign Trade Minister Tadeusz Nestorowicz. That afternoon the two leaders held three hours of talks, mainly on the consolidation of co-operation between their two countries in the economy. Understand-able differences stemmed from different economic and social conditions, but their conversation was marked by mutual trust. General Jaruzelski stressed the role played in international affairs by Yugoslavia, an initiator of the non-aligned movement. A group from the two delegations also held talks on international affairs, which were agreed to be alarming. The two sides took into account the differences between the two countries' international positions. Deputy Foreign Secretary Mirko Ostojic and Foreign Minister Stefan Olszowski also had a meeting. The group for economic and scientific-technical questions agreed that there were opportunities for broader economic co-operation; production co-operation and specialization already accounted for 25% of the planned trade for 1984 worth 700,000,000 dollars 

At a dinner that evening in honor of the Yugoslav guest, Premier Jaruzelski said that relations between the two countries were characterized by mutual respect. Poland's difficulties were being overcome, in part because of the re-orientation of the Polish economy towards lasting links with the Soviet Union and other socialist countries. In reply, Milka Planinc spoke of the traditional friendship between the two countries, the development of co-operation, especially economic, and Yugoslavia's efforts for international peace. She also said that Yugoslavia had on many past occasions expressed its conviction that only the Polish people, the Polish working class, the PZPR and other democratic and patriotic forces were called upon and capable, without outside inter-ference, of implementing fully the progress towards socialist renewal and Poland's further development. 

On July 10, 1985, Yugoslavia and Poland agreed to increase their trade by 60 percent to about 4.9 billion US dollars from 1986 to 1990 as against the last five years. The agreement was reached here during talks between Yugoslav premier Mulka Planinc and polish leader Wojciech Jaruzelski who arrived to Belgrade for a three-day official visit. A protocol on Yugoslav-Polish economic cooperation for the period of 1986-1990 signed on July 10th, 1985, defined that both sides will strengthen their cooperation on specialized production. The protocol, which was seen as the basis of specific cooperative projects between the two countries in the next five years, also prescribed the proportion of some products and raw materials in the two countries' trade. The two countries will especially emphasize their cooperation in the machine-building, electronics, electric cable, food-processing, household facility and light industries. Poland is an important trade partner of Yugoslavia in the CMEA (council for mutual economic assistance) states. Trade between the two countries is expected to reach 780 million US dollars this year, and three-billion dollars during the years from 1981 to 1985.

At the invitation of SFR Yugoslav Federal Secretary for National Defence Branko Mamula, Polish Army General Florian Siwicki began an official visit to Yugoslavia on 8th December, 1986. The last occasion on which a Polish Defence Minister visited the SFRY was 14 years before in 1972. Talks that afternoon about inter-army co-operation were conducted in a cordial and friendly atmosphere. On the second day of his visit Siwicki met the Commander of Nis Army District, Gen Ivan Radanovic, was the guest of a parachute brigade, and visited an industrial enterprise in Kragujevac. On the 10th, Branko Mamula and Florian Siwicki resumed their talks. Both agreed that all the conditions existed for even more meaningful development of inter-army relations. The talks were al so attended by Col-Gen Milan Daljevic, Under-Secretary in the Federal Secretariat for National Defence; Lt-Col-Gen Svetislav Popovic, Assistant Federal Secretary for National Defence; Lt-Col-Gen Zdravko Loncar; Vice-Adm Ljubivoje Jokic; Maj-Gen Konrad Kolsek; and other officers. 

On June 26, 1991, Poland confirmed its invariable support for the unity, territorial integrity and democratic development of Yugoslavia in statement issued by the Polish Foreign Ministry in connection with the recent developments in Yugoslavia. He added that `Poland still maintains good relations with Yugoslavia and that Poland also wants to develop various contacts with individual republics.' 

On August 6th, 1991, Poland halted all arms sales to Yugoslavia "until further notice". Armament, military equipment, ammunition as well as military technology will fall under the embargo, PAP quoted government spokesman Andrzej Zarebski as saying. The decision covers any future contracts, plus those already underway, Zarebski said. He would not say who would shoulder any financial losses caused by the embargo. The daily Gazeta Wyborcza reported that no contracts had been concluded with Yugoslavia since the start of the conflict over Slovenia's and Croatia's declaration of independence in June 1990, but that spare parts were being shipped for goods supplied previously. Zarebski said the Polish arms freeze was aimed at "stopping the bloodbath in Yugoslavia" and not meant as a sanction against the country.

On April 30th, 1992, the recognition by Poland of the new Yugoslavia was still an open matter. The Polish officials described the question of recognition as `delicate'. Serbia, which forms the core of the new Yugoslav state, has been Poland's chief trade partner. Poland made it clear that it won't make unilateral decisions and a possible recognition will be influenced by the stand of the European Community. 

On June 6th, 1992, the Yugoslav authorities have received a directive from the Polish Foreign Ministry that ''two high-ranking officials from the embassy of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia be withdrawn from Polish territory within a week'', according to the director of the European department at the Foreign Ministry, Andrzej Ananicz. Poland's directive is a response to the UN Security Council resolution of 30th May, 1992, which imposed sanctions on Yugoslavia. 

It is not excluded that Poland will limit the numbers of its diplomatic personnel in Yugoslavia, but ''we have to consider in which area and at which level. I am not sure if that will not cause a significant drop in our activity where the interests of our citizens on Yugoslav territory are concerned'', said Ananicz. He recalled that there was an absolute ban on trade between Yugoslavia and Poland but this did not mean that existing contracts would be broken, he added as ''they are not regarded as being null and void, only their realization will be suspended''.

On December 2, 1992, Poland stated that it can provide shelter to refugees from the former Yugoslavia but is unable to cover their costs of living, Prime Minister Hanna Suchocka and former Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki, a special envoy of the UN Human Rights Commissioner to the former Yugoslavia, told journalists. ''If we manage to get funds from international organizations, the government is willing to accept another 1,000 refugees next to the 1,200 who have already come to Poland,'' Ms Suchocka said after meeting Mazowiecki this afternoon. She also said Poland was unable to finance the operation on its own because of its tight budget but added she hoped Polish families will be also willing to accept refugees on an individual basis.

On November 30th, 1994, the Polish Foreign Minister Andrzej Olechowski stated that if the situation in the former Yugoslavia further aggravates and an armed conflict escalates Poland will not be able to keep its soldiers in that country as part of the UN peacekeeping operation. 

On December 7th, 1995, Yugoslavia made it clear that it wants to resume cooperation in all areas with Poland after four years of isolation. Yugoslavia wants to cooperate with Poland in the spheres of economy, culture and politics. It has already turned to the Polish Foreign Ministry to resume diplomatic contacts at the embassy level.

On September 3rd, 1996, the Foreign Ministers of the Republic of Poland and of the Yugoslavia Darjusz Rosati and Milan Milutinovic respectively signed an agreement on the protection of and support for mutual investments in Belgrade. The Ministers also signed agreements on cultural cooperation and cooperation of both countries' foreign ministries and exchanged noted on easing visa requirements. Both ministers expressed hope that successive agreements including the one on avoiding double taxation, which is being negotiated at present, will be signed during the Polish visit to FRY Prime Minister Radoje Kontic, who has been invited by Prime Minister Wlodzimierz Cimoszewicz.

Poland will support Yugoslavia's efforts to rejoin the international community, Polish President Alexander Kwasniewski told Yugoslav Premier Radoje Kontic on June 13, 1997. "All steps leading towards a return to normalcy in the region are being supported by Poland. This is our moral duty," Kwasniewski said.

However, the government in Belgrade should at the same time work for national reconciliation because this was a must for membership in the European organizations, the Polish president told Kontic who ended a two-day visit on June 13, 1997. The two leaders also supported greater economic and political cooperation between Warsaw and Belgrade, with Kontic saying that tariff barriers were the greatest obstacle to a substantial increase in trade. Before the war in the Balkans, annual trade between Poland and Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) was 400 million dollars. In 1996 it was only 60 million dollars. On June 12, 1997, the two sides signed several cooperation accords in the fields of agriculture, food and food processing and health. Kontic and Polish Prime Minister Wlodzimierz Cimoszewski said the two countries would soon start talks on a repatriation agreement and cancelling visa requirements.

The first MID of RIV761, MID4137 started involving Poland on March 9th, 1998. In response to Yugoslav military activity in the bordering Kosovo region, Albania, followed by other nations, took military action against Yugoslavia. Albania began by fortifying its border with Yugoslavia, and engaged in numerous subsequent incidents with Yugoslavia over its stance toward ethnic Albanians in Kosovo. Beginning in mid-1998, NATO states (including Poland as a member state) began conducting military exercises and other shows of force and began to threaten Yugoslavia with airstrikes if it did not change its Kosovo policy. Yugoslavia responded with mobilizations and other militarized actions. From 3/24/99, NATO countries began carrying out airstrikes against Yugoslavia, which acceded to NATO demands to leave Kosovo in early June 1999. NATO bombings ceased on 6/10/99.

20001129-20069999 0.5

The last MID of RIV761, MID4343 ended on November 28th, 2000. MID4343 started on November 24, 2000 and lasted until November 28, 2000. The Serbian Interior Ministry said in a statement on November 24, that NATO must stop "terrorists" from entering Serbia from Kosovo by the evening of 27 November. If the infiltration and attacks continue, Serbian police will enter the 5-kilometer buffer zone along the border with Kosovo "with the means that are available," Bozo Prelevic said. He is one of three interior ministers in the transitional Serbian government. On 27 November, however, Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Nebojsa Covic said near Bujanovac that the deadline is "simply postponed" indefinitely to give diplomacy a chance. AP reported, however, that a military buildup is under way on either side. NATO has called on the two sides to show restraint. This whole MID was over the deadline and the threat to use violence Serbian police gave NATO forces.

Poland will lend Yugoslavia 50 million USD to help the country emerge from more than a decade of mismanagement, Polish Prime Minister Leszek Miller said on December 12, 2001. The loan is to cover future Yugoslav purchases of Polish goods and payment of related services. Details of the arrangement are to be worked out next week in the Yugoslav capital between expert teams, the Yugoslav government said. Miller, on his first official visit to Yugoslavia since his Cabinet was sworn in October 2001, met his Yugoslav counterpart, Dragisa Pesic. Afterward, he said Poland supports the economic reforms initiated by Yugoslavia's new democratic leadership that took over a year ago from Slobodan Milosevic, after he was ousted as Yugoslav president. On 11 March,2002, Yugoslav Foreign Minister Goran Svilanovic said in Warsaw that Belgrade will continue close cooperation with "The Hague tribunal, the international community and the United Nations" and will fulfil all its international commitments. Svilanovic, who is on a one-day official visit to Poland, told reporters after meeting with his Polish counterpart Wlodzimierz Cimoszewicz he hoped that Yugoslav parliament will soon deliberate a bill providing for the extradition of war crime suspects to the tribunal in The Hague. "Underway are political talks on the law, I do not know when a consensus will be reached, but I would like the bill to be passed in parliament," the Yugoslav foreign minister added. Speaking about Kosovo-Metohija, Svilanovic assessed that the "European community should count on a long-term military and economic presence" in the province. In his opinion, an improvement of the economic situation in Kosovo-Metohija is much more important than changes of the status of the province.

Yugoslavia and Poland have well developed political cooperation and plan to intensify all forms of inter-army cooperation too, Yugoslav Defence Minister Velimir Radojevic and Secretary of State in the Polish Defence Ministry Undersecretary of State for Defence Policy Andrzej Towpik said on 27 November 2002 in Belgrade. Tovpik, who is attending in Belgrade an international seminar on the experiences and challenges of armed forces' reform, conveyed to his Yugoslav colleagues Poland's experiences in reforming the security sector and adapting legislation to Euro-Atlantic standards, the Defence Ministry said. Yugoslavia, or the future state community of Serbia and Montenegro, expects admission to the Partnership for Peace program, having met all general and special preconditions, Radojevic said.

On November 8th and 9th, 2004, Serbia and Montenegro's President Svetozar Marovic paid a two-day official visit to Poland. He met with President Aleksander Kwasniewski, Prime Minister Marek Belka and deputy Sejm and Senate Speakers Tomasz Nalecz and Ryszard Jarzembowski. Planned is also a meeting with businessmen from Poland and
Serbia and Montenegro. According to head of the Presidential Office for International Affairs Wieslaw Scholz Poland's good relations with Serbia and Montenegro might help this Balkan country come closer the EU. Talks planned during the visit are to focus on economic issues, Scholz said and added that Poland's economic relations with Serbia and Montenegro were developing well. Poland had a surplus in trade with that country, he added. In the recent three years mutual trade went up three times and reached 125 million USD, with Poland's exports amounting to 101 million USD. Scholz added Poland wanted to develop cooperation in telecommunication and transport and sell construction machines and equipment to Serbia and Montenegro. We want to sign agreements on air transport and combating organized crime, Scholz added.

The Polish Foreign Minister Adam Daniel Rotfeld began a two-day working visit in Serbia and Montenegro on 6 June, 2005 to discuss issues relating to the country's cooperation with NATO and the EU, and the situation in the region. He will meet Polish soldiers from the NATO KFOR[Kosovo Force] force in Kosovo. The visit is paid following an invitation from Serbia's and Montenegro's Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic. During his two-day visit Rotfeld will meet the presidents, prime ministers and foreign ministers of the two republics, and with the Kosovo provisional authorities.

Poland supports further EU enlargement, also by the Balkan states, Polish deputy foreign minister Pawel Kowal said on December 11, 2006, in Warsaw. Kowal, attending a seminar on EU enlargement hosted by Poland's Foreign Affairs Institute, said Poland primarily viewed the EU as a community based on values, history and experience. This is why Poland sticks by its position that all countries in Europe and within the European culture model must be provided with legally-anchored EU membership prospects. Kowal reminded that Poland was an enlargement advocate even before it joined the EU but noted that some political circles in Europe were "visibly tired with enlargement". In early May the EC suspended its 2005-launched association talks with Serbia-Montenegro on grounds of Belgrade's failing cooperation regarding war crimes in the former Yugoslavia.

PS-SOURCES: New York Times November 16, 1955; October 18, 1946; July 7, 1949; February 2nd, 1958; October 25, 1971; June 24, 1972; February 25, 1973; July 30, 1980; July 2, 1981; Xinhua April 25, 1979; December 7, 1980; March 27, 1981; July 3, 1981; July 10, 1985; BBC May 12, 1979; July 7, 1984; December 13, 1986; June 6, 1992; December 2, 1992; June 19, 1997; December 12, 2001; March 11, 2002; November 27, 2002; July 5, 2005; December 11, 2006; PAP News Wire December 17, 1990; June 26, 1991; February 21, 1992; June 2, 1992; April 30, 1992; July 28, 1993; November 30, 1994; December 7, 1995; March 15, 1996; September 3, 1996; November 5, 2004; Agence France Presse August 6, 1991; Deutsche Presse-Agentur June 13, 1997; TASS June 13, 1997; Associated Press December 12, 2001

MARITIME-MIDS:

MARITIME-DISPUTE:

Discussion:
