FILE: cm300327v11.0.txt
DYAD: AUSTRIA-HUNGARY - PAPAL STATES
RIVALRY: RIV775
DISPUTE(S): MID78 MID374 MID175 

PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20180211
PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20180211

Territorial-Maritime-Boundary Issues Variables

Pre-1900 MIDs: MID78 MID374 MID175 

RIVNOTES: 

NARRATIVE-CM:

SOURCES-CM:

NARRATIVE-CR: 
Austria was wary of the French Revolutionary spirit that was moving across Europe, and thus promoted "anti-revolutionary 'reforms'" (Schroeder 1994, p. 622) in the Papal State in 1822. However within eight years, further unrest began to appear in Northern Italy. The Papal State enacted a series of reforms that were designed to prevent revolution in the middle of 1830, but did not act decisively, as the Papal State was "counting from the outset on Austrian intervention if needed" (Schroeder, p. 692). These reforms were dealt a blow when Pius VIII died in November, and was replaced by Gregory XVI three months later. Immediately following Gregory's election revolts that began in Modena spread to the Papal State. In March of 1831, Austrian troops entered the Papal State (at Rome's request) to quell the unrest. The intervention was successful and largely nonviolent. 

This action by Austria forced France, Austria and the Papal State to reevaluate their goals in Europe. Austria wanted to minimize French influence in Italy and strengthen the Pope's authority via administrative reforms. France wanted to increase its influence in Italy at the expense of Austria. The Papal State wanted Austrian assistance in stopping the revolt, but had to deal with a large party, the Zelanti, that wanted to diminish all foreign influence on Rome. 
These conflicting aims led to a five-power conference in April through July of 1831. The stated goal of the conference was to reform Papal rule so that a stronger Papal State would not require Austrian troops to maintain power. The Papal State was not eager to be entangled in this conference, but the concerns of the Great Powers obligated Rome to attend.

Papal reforms were minor at best. The larger issue at the conference was French pressure to evacuate Austrian troops. Rome was not sanguine about this, but was compelled to agree to the troop withdrawal in exchange for a guarantee of Papal territory and an agreement that Austrian troops could enter the Papal State again if a revolt were to erupt. Just as the Papal State agreed to this, France walked out of the conference. Thus the conference was a failure; only minor administrative reforms were accomplished. However, under pressure from Britain, France, and Prussia, Austrian troops withdrew from the Papal State on 15 July 1831. 

As the reforms were insufficient to solidify Papal rule, Austrian troops were again needed to maintain Rome's authority. In late January of 1832, Austrian troops moved into the Papal State. On 23 February 1831 French troops entered the port of Ancona in the Papal State, took Papal territory, and engaged in liberal, anti-Austrian propaganda. The Pope argued that this was a case for war with France, but had no intention of fighting. An agreement between the Papal State and France settled the issue, but both French and Austrian troops remained in the Papal State, although Austria was not especially pleased with this outcome.

The break in Austrian-Papal relations followed the election of Pius IX, who replaced Gregory XVI in 1846. Austria was not prepared for a liberal Pope, and Pius IX, "a man of genuine piety and vague goodwill but limited intelligence," (Schroeder 1994, p. 778) was one that sympathized with Italian nationalism. Metternich felt that any leniency that the Pope made to Italian revolutionaries would eventually be used to eliminate the Papal State in favor of a larger Italy. However, Pius IX rejected Austrian advice and followed the French suggestion that he offer concessions to the revolutionaries. 

In the midst of these tensions, Austrian troops garrisoning the citadel of Ferrara on the Papal side of the Po river expanded their presence to include the occupation of the entire town in July and August of 1847. (MID78) While this expanded presence might have been legal, Pius IX protested the occupation. The issue was settled peacefully in December by Austrian, Prussian, and Russian cooperation. 

On 13 March 1848 Metternich falls from power as foreign minister in Austria as liberal revolutions swept across Europe; his temporary replacement, Pillardorf, led a foreign service that was in disarray. Sardinia and Austria go to war on 24 March 1848, and the Papal State joins on the side of Sardinia on March 22. Four days later, the Pope "disclaimed all intentions of making war on the Catholic Austrians" (Langer 1968). (MID374) Wessenberg becomes Metternich's permanent replacement; once he is in place the government of Austria begins to prosecute the war with vigor. Austria is victorious on 25 July 1848 at Custoza. The Sardinian army and its allies are defeated. An "armistice of simple military character" (Taylor 1971, p.21) concluded the war on 9 August. On 2 September, Wessenberg accepted Anglo-French mediation to settle the outstanding issues between Sardinia and Austria.

On 21 November 1848, Wessenberg was replaced by Schwarzenberg as foreign minister of Austria. He stated that Austria would attend the planed Anglo-French conference at Brussels only if Austria were given a guarantee that there would be no territorial redistribution. France and Great Britain balked, and as the stalemate continued, radicals in Sardinia agitated for renewed aggression. By mid-March 1949, Sardinia and her allies renewed her war with Austria. (MID175??) Again Sardinia was quickly defeated, and this time the Sardinian King Charles Albert abdicates. 6 August 1849 a peace treaty is signed in Milan which ends the conflict and reestablished the pre-war status quo.

The Papal State exits the system in 1860 as a result of Italian unification. Piedmont, under Cavour, began to consolidate power in Northern Italy in 1859. On 8 September 1859 there was an uprising in the Papal State, which Cavour used as an excuse to intervene two days later. On 18 September 1859, the Papal forces were annihilated at Castelfidaro by Piedmontese forces. This essentially eliminated the independence of the Papal State. The Kingdom of Italy was declared on 17 March 1861.

SOURCES-CR: 
Langer 1968, Taylor 1954 Albrecht-Carre 1958, Langer 1968, Schroeder 1994, Taylor 1954 

