FILE: cm345385v11.0.txt
DYAD: YUGOSLAVIA-NORWAY
RIVALRY: RIV914 ISOLATED
DISPUTE(S): MID4137 MID4186 MID4343 

RIVNOTES: 

RIV914 is considered an isolated rivalry because all the MIDs are part of one war.
RIV914: MID4186, this MID has been broken up into two MID4186 & MID4343 because the incidents were more than 6 months apart in mid3.02

PS-NOTES:

PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20180216
PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20180217

Territorial-Maritime-Boundary Issues Variables

MID4137 

TERRMID: MID4137 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID4137 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID4137 from cm narrative, this is the Kosovo conflict, February 1998-June 1999. Fighting erupted in Kosovo between ethnic Albanians and Serbs, and Serbian President Milosevic sent troops to fight inside Kosovo. UN/NATO militarily intervened to stop the violence, triggering their involvement in this MID. Coded third party link to territory because Kosovo had declared independence, but Serbia did not recognize them and declared Kosovo as part of its territory in the interest of "protecting" the ethnic Serbs there. 

MARITMID: MID4137 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID4137 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4137 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID4137 the Yugoslav Wars featured fighting inside several states by militarized rebel groups organized along ethnic lines. In Yugoslavia, ethnic Serb and Albanian militias were fighting against each other, and ethnic Albanian militias were also fighting against Yugoslavian forces. 

CIVWARLINK: MID4137 1 -- civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID4137 from cm narrative, part of the Kosovo conflict involved fighting between ethnic Albanian and Serbian civilians. Insurgencies formed along ethnic lines and took part in the fighting. Coded civil war link because this civil war activity was connected to the UN/NATO involvement in Kosovo, bringing Norway into this MID. This MID is also coded civil war MID in other dyads. 

COUPMID: MID4137 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4137 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4137 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID4186 

TERRMID: MID4186 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID4186 1 -- third party link to territorial MID 
TERRLINK-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID4186 from cm narrative, this is one of two MIDs connected to Yugoslavia's withdrawal from Kosovo and the lingering hostilities between Yugoslavia and UN/NATO forces. Clashes occurred as Milosevic was attempting to hold onto power in Serbia. Coded third party link to territory because Kosovo was partially territorial in nature, as Yugoslavia did not recognize its independence and claimed its territory as its own due to ethnic Serbs. UN/NATO countries' military intervention in Kosovo pulls them into this MID. 

MARITMID: MID4186 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID4186 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4186 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID4186 the Yugoslav Wars featured fighting inside several states by militarized rebel groups organized along ethnic lines. In Yugoslavia, ethnic Serb and Albanian militias were fighting against each other, and ethnic Albanian militias were also fighting against Yugoslavian forces. 

CIVWARLINK: MID4186 1 -- civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID4186 from cm narrative, this is one of two MIDs connected to Yugoslavia's withdrawl from Kosovo and the lingering hostilities between Yugoslavia and UN/NATO forces. Clashes occurred as Milosevic attempted to hold onto power in Serbia. Coded civil war link because civil war activity in Kosovo, outide of this dyad, contributed to the violence. Ethnic Serbs and ethnic Albanians fought throughout the conflict. UN/NATO military intervention pulls them into this MID.

COUPMID: MID4186 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4186 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4186 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID4343 

TERRMID: MID4343 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID4343 1 -- third party link to territorial MID 
TERRLINK-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID4343 from cm narrative, this is one of two MIDs connected to Yugoslavia's withdrawal from Kosovo and the lingering hostilities between Yugoslavia and UN/NATO forces. Clashes occurred as Milosevic was attempting to hold onto power in Serbia. Coded third party link to territory because Kosovo was partially territorial in nature, as Yugoslavia did not recognize its independence and claimed its territory as its own due to ethnic Serbs. UN/NATO countries' military intervention in Kosovo pulls them into this MID. 

MARITMID: MID4343 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID4343 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4343 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID4343 the Yugoslav Wars featured fighting inside several states by militarized rebel groups organized along ethnic lines. In Yugoslavia, ethnic Serb and Albanian militias were fighting against each other, and ethnic Albanian militias were also fighting against Yugoslavian forces. 

CIVWARLINK: MID4343 1 -- civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID4343 from cm narrative, this is one of two MIDs connected to Yugoslavia's withdrawal from Kosovo and the lingering hostilities between Yugoslavia and UN/NATO forces. Clashes occurred as Milosevic attempted to hold onto power in Serbia. Coded civil war link because civil war activity in Kosovo, outide of this dyad, contributed to the violence. Ethnic Serbs and ethnic Albanians fought throughout the conflict. UN/NATO military intervention pulls them into this MID.

COUPMID: MID4343 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4343 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4343 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID3 1993-2001:

MID4137
rivalry=345385 nationa=NORWAY nationb=YUGOSLAVIA-SERBIA MID4137 19980611-19990610 
 revtype1a=POLICY revtype2a=NOT APPLICABLE fatala=NONE fatalpa=0 lhosta=USE OF FORCE 
 revtype1b=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2b=NOT APPLICABLE fatalb=501-999 DEATHS
fatalpb=. lhostb=USE OF FORCE 

In response to Yugoslav military activity in the bordering Kosovo region, Albania, followed by other nations, took military action against Yugoslavia. Albania began by fortifying its border with Yugoslavia, and engaged in numerous subsequent incidents with Yugoslavia over its stance toward ethnic Albanians in Kosovo. Beginning in mid-1998, NATO states began conducting military exercises and other shows of force and began to threaten Yugoslavia with airstrikes if it did not change its Kosovo policy. Yugoslavia responded with mobilizations and other militarized actions. From 3/24/99, NATO countries began carrying out airstrikes against Yugoslavia, which acceded to NATO demands to leave Kosovo in early June 1999. NATO bombings ceased on 6/10/99. First day of dispute was on 6/11/1998 and last day of dispute was on 6/10/1999.

MID4186
rivalry=345385 nationa=NORWAY nationb=YUGOSLAVIA-SERBIA MID4186 20000221-20000403 
 revtype1a=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2a=NOT APPLICABLE fatala=NONE fatalpa=0 lhosta=THREAT TO USE FORCE 
 revtype1b=POLICY revtype2b=NOT APPLICABLE fatalb=NONE
fatalpb=0 lhostb=DISPLAY OF FORCE 

This dispute deals with the relationship between NATO and Yugoslavia. At this time KFOR was patrolling the border between Kosovo and Yugoslavia, but a number of rebels from Kosovo were continuing to infiltrate into Yugoslavia and attack Serb police officers. Yugoslavia originally moved forces to the border to counter the actions by the Kosovars and this was met with a NATO threat. First day of dispute was on 2/21/2000 and last day of dispute was on 4/3/2000.

MID4343
rivalry=345385 nationa=YUGOSLAVIA-SERBIA nationb=NORWAY MID4343 20001124-20001128 
 revtype1a=POLICY revtype2a=NOT APPLICABLE fatala=NONE fatalpa=0 lhosta=DISPLAY OF FORCE 
 revtype1b=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2b=NOT APPLICABLE fatalb=NONE fatalpb=0
lhostb=NO MILITARIZED ACTION 

First day of dispute was on 11/24/2000 and last day of dispute was on 11/28/2000.

NO DISPUTE NARRATIVE AVAILABLE FROM COW

NARRATIVE-CM:
MID4137 In response to Yugoslav military activity in the bordering Kosovo region, Albania, followed by other nations, took military action against Yugoslavia. Albania began by fortifying its border with Yugoslavia, and engaged in numerous subsequent incidents with Yugoslavia over its stance toward ethnic Albanians in Kosovo. Beginning in mid-1998, NATO states began conducting military exercises and other shows of force and began to threaten Yugoslavia with airstrikes if it did not change its Kosovo policy. Yugoslavia responded with mobilizations and other militarized actions. From 3/24/99, NATO countries began carrying out airstrikes against Yugoslavia, which acceded to NATO demands to leave Kosovo in early June 1999. NATO bombings ceased on 6/10/99.

MID4186 deals with the relationship between NATO and Yugoslavia. At this time KFOR was patrolling the border between Kosovo and Yugoslavia, but a number of rebels from Kosovo were continuing to infiltrate into Yugoslavia and attack Serb police officers. Yugoslavia originally moved forces to the border to counter the actions by the Kosovars and this was met with a NATO threat. 

MID4343 ended on November 28th, 2000. MID4343 started on November 24, 2000 and lasted until November 28, 2000. The Serbian Interior Ministry said in a statement on November 24, that NATO must stop "terrorists" from entering Serbia from Kosovo by the evening of 27 November. If the infiltration and attacks continue, Serbian police will enter the 5-kilometer buffer zone along the border with Kosovo "with the means that are available," Bozo Prelevic said. He is one of three interior ministers in the transitional Serbian government. On 27 November, however, Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Nebojsa Covic said near Bujanovac that the deadline is "simply postponed" indefinitely to give diplomacy a chance. AP reported, however, that a military buildup is under way on either side. NATO has called on the two sides to show restraint. This whole MID was over the deadline and the threat to use violence Serbian police gave NATO forces.

SOURCES-CM:

NARRATIVE-CR:

SOURCES-CR:

PS-NARRATIVE:

19460131-19980610 0.5 

The Yugoslav government announced on December 22, 1950 that it accepted an offer of economic assistance from Norway and that an agreement on credits would be signed soon. The credit will be used to buy Norwegian fish. 

On May 13th, 1965, Yugoslavia's leader Tito and Norwegian Premier Einar Gerhardsen held talks in Oslo. They agreed that their two countries will work to strengthen United Nations and that there is an urgent need to prevent a further spread of nuclear weapons. This was the first official visit ever paid by an Yugoslav leader to Norway. 

King Olav V of Norway started a five-days official visit to Belgrade on September 5th, 1966. The King and his party were welcomed at the airport by Yugoslav President Tito.

In May 1979, experts from Yugoslavia and EFTA are to prepare a publication in which they will present recommendations for developing their relations. The document will be based on a seminar which has just ended in Belgrade. At the meeting it was stated that the Yugoslav market is more open to the products of EFTA countries than that of the USA or Japan. At the same time Yugoslav exports to EFTA countries were a quarter or a third of its imports from the area. A series of bilateral meetings will be held with economic representatives from Austria, Finland, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland with a view to remedying this situation.

On 16th October, 1979, Lazar Kolisevski, Vice-President of the Yugoslav Presidency, and Knut Frydenlund discussed Yugoslav-Norwegian relations and international issues. Kolisevski informed Frydenlund about Yugoslavia's position on co-operation within Europe and the Balkans and with neighboring countries. On the same day the Norwegian Minister held final talks with Foreign Secretary Josip Vrhovec. They agreed that there were possibilities for intensifying economic co-operation, particularly in the advanced economic field, production, joint investments and ventures on third markets. They stressed their mutual interest in ensuring that the Helsinki Final Act was fully adhered to, and underlined the importance of world-wide detente. Vrhovec accepted an invitation to visit Norway. 

A three-year program of scientific and cultural co-operation between Yugoslavia and Norway was signed in Oslo on 16th January, 1980, by Mladen Pjaca, Director of the Bosnia Herzegovina Institute for International Scientific, Technical and Cultural-Educational Co-operation, who heads the Yugoslav delegation. Norway is the first Nordic country to sign such an agreement with Yugoslavia, although co-operation between the two countries has been progressing successfully for many years now. The Yugoslav Ambassador, Djon Siroka was present at the signing ceremony. 

Although not a member, Yugoslavia will for the first time be represented at May's 1983 ministerial meeting of the European Free Trade Association in Bergen, Norway. Tor Husby, a spokesman for the Norwegian Ministry of Trade, said the final decision to open up the meeting on June 2-3, 2003, for Yugoslavia was taken recently after consideration by members of the association. Yugoslavia wants even closer co-operation with EFTA than at present but has not applied for full or associate membership, Husby said. Members of the group are Austria, Iceland, Norway, Portugal, Sweden and Switzerland. Finland has been an associate member since 1961. Britain and Denmark, both among the original founders, left when joining the European Economic Community.

An inter-governmental agreement was concluded in Belgrade on 5th December, 1984, on the consolidation of Yugoslavia's payments of principal to Norway due this year; it provides a credit on favorable conditions. A special agreement regulating the implementation of the inter-governmental agreement was also concluded by the Zagreb Bank on behalf of the Federal Government with a consortium of Norwegian banks representing the Norwegian Government.

Exports to Norway from Yugoslavia in 1985 were worth 8,500,000 dollars and imports from there 18,500,000 USD. With the aim of achieving a better balance in the two countries' trade, a protocol was signed in Belgrade on 9th April, 1986, at a session of the joint economic commission. Shipping and tourism are designated as fields where there is scope for further development of co-operation. Yugoslavia is interested in increasing exports of agricultural products to Norway, primarily wine and tobacco. Norway is interested in marketing metallurgical equipment, electrical appliances and electronic products in Yugoslavia.

On May 29, 1987, Yugoslav and Norwegian Government officials have signed an agreement on rescheduling Yugoslavia's debt. The agreement covers 1986-88 and reschedules NKR 80m of Yugoslav debt.

Thorvald Stoltenberg, Norway's Minister of Foreign Affairs arrived for an official visit to Belgrade on 4th November, 1987, and was met at Belgrade airport by Budimir Loncar, Deputy Federal Secretary for Foreign Affairs. The first round of talks between the Norwegian Minister and his host, Federal Foreign Secretary Raif Dizdarevic began on 5th November, 1987, with emphasis on bilateral issues. The two sides discussed economic relations, technical co-operation and the development of co-operation in tourism. The Yugoslav Foreign Secretary expressed the interest and readiness of the Yugoslav economy to take part in the Eureka project through Norwegian enterprises already involved in it. The Norwegian Minister stressed that Norway wished to help expand the relations between EFTA and Yugoslavia. According to Yugoslav diplomatic sources, the talks were held in an atmosphere of ''exceptional cordiality, friendship and frankness''. The two sides recalled Minister Stoltenberg's stay in Belgrade in 1961-64 as First Secretary of the Norwegian Embassy, during which he learnt Serbo-Croat and consequently reads leading Yugoslav papers almost daily. Later that day Minister Stoltenberg was received by Lazar Mojsov, President of the SFRY Presidency, for friendly talks which focused on bilateral co-operation, developments in the Middle East and relations between the developed and developing countries. The two sides assessed that economic co-operation had increased in recent years, with good prospects for even faster progress, especially in the shipbuilding industry. Raif Dizdarevic attended the talks. 

The second round of talks between Raif Dizdarevic and Thorvald Stoltenberg opened in Belgrade the same evening with a discussion on economic co-operation between Yugoslavia and the EFTA member countries. The Norwegian Minister explained why Norway was unable to accept over 8,000 foreigners, including about 900 people of mainly Albanian nationality, who had arrived in Norway during 1987 seeking employment. When it came to Yugoslav citizens, it was a matter of economic motives for emigration, but a number of foreigners, some of them from Yugoslavia, had sought to obtain a residence and work permit by asking for political asylum. The Norwegian government had decided to return the majority of these foreigners to their native countries, Minister Stoltenberg said. Raif Dizdarevic replied that Yugoslavia appreciated such an attitude, stressing that every Yugoslav citizen had the right to travel freely to and from the country. The two sides analysed in detail East-West relations and noted the vital need for a successful outcome of the Vienna CSCE meeting. Raif Dizdarevic briefed his Norwegian opposite number on Balkan and Mediterranean co-operation and Stoltenberg spoke about Nordic co-operation and problems of this region's security. The two Ministers noted the identity or similarity of views on numerous issues concerning international relations. Minister Stoltenberg invited Raif Dizdarevic to pay a visit to Norway; the invitation was accepted with pleasure. On 6th November, 1987, Thorvald Stoltenberg was received by FEC President Branko Mikulic. In the talks, also attended by Raif Dizdarevic, they exchanged views on bilateral co-operation, the position of Yugoslavia in relation to European integration processes and some issues of international economic relations. Mikulic and Stoltenberg stressed that there were still untapped opportunities in science and technology, industrial co-operation, tourism and in particular health tourism. The Norwegian Minister expressed support for Yugoslav efforts to join scientific, technological and economic processes in Europe and to remove some political obstacles preventing the access of the Yugoslav economy to individual Prior to leaving Yugoslavia the same evening, Thorvald Stoltenberg visited the town of Gornji Milanovac where he laid flowers at the monument to Yugoslav internees and visited the House of Yugoslav-Norwegian Friendship. The Norwegian Minister was seen off by Raif Dizdarevic. 

Norway supports European Community punitive measures against Yugoslavia and suspends all economical, industrial and technical cooperation with Yugoslavia, a foreign ministry spokesman announced on November 19, 1991. Yugoslavia is immediately barred from all preferential trade, spokesman Bjoern Blokhus said. Stressing that the EC and other Western nations have not launched a trade embargo, he added that the punitive measures to reduce trade and other forms of cooperation contain a strong political warning that the fighting must stop immediately. Norway also supports the EC initiative to let the United Nations Security Council take the necessary steps to impose an oil embargo. The Norwegian government will suspend the use of a 100 million crown (16 million dollars) fund raised by the seven countries belonging to the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) to promote the reconstruction of outdated Yugoslav factories, Blokhus said. Norway's trade with Yugoslavia is modest with an import worth 268 million crowns (42.5 million dollars) in the first eight months of this year. Exports totaled 129 million crowns (20.4 million dollars) in the same period, consisting mainly of equipment for the shipbuilding industry.

The President of the Yugoslav Republic of Serbia, Slobodan Milosevic, on 4th September, 1992, said he expected the intensified engagement of the United Nations in the resolution of the Yugoslav crisis and the numerous missions of the world organization, the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) and other international forums would help create an unbiased picture of the policy pursued by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republic of Serbia.

Milosevic said during a meeting with Norwegian Foreign Minister Thorvald Stoltenberg that the Geneva negotiations on the implementation of the conclusions adopted by the international conference on Yugoslavia in London last week would also help clarify the actual causes of the war conflict in the former Yugoslav Republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina. The statement released on the meeting between Milosevic and Stoltenberg said the Norwegian minister, for his part, underscored his government's readiness to contribute to the establishment of peace and the revival of cooperation and confidence in the Balkans. Stoltenberg arrived on an one-day visit to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on Friday, as part of his fact-finding mission in the former Yugoslav Republics. The Norwegian minister visited the capital of Bosnia-Hercegovina, Sarajevo, the capital of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Skopje, and the capital of Serbia's Province of Kosovo-Metohija, Pristina, on Thursday and Friday. Stoltenberg met in Pristina with the head of the Kosovo-Metohija district, Dr Milos Simovic. Simovic said ethnic Albanians in Kosovo-Metohija enjoyed all the rights guaranteed to national minorities but did not want to exercise them because they do not recognize the Republic of Serbia and only insist on the independence of Kosovo and its secession. Stoltenberg met in Pristina also with Ibrahim Rugova, leader of the Democratic Alliance of Kosovo (DSK), the largest ethnic-Albanian party in the province, without the press attending. It was learned, however, that Rugova said he was dissatisfied with the international community's stand that the problem of Kosovo be resolved within the framework of the Republic of Serbia.

Peace brokers Norwegian Thorvald Stoltenberg and British Lord Owen on April 29, 1993, met Russia's special representative Vitaly Churkin to discuss the situation in former Yugoslavia. A brief statement from the Norwegian foreign ministry gave no information about their talks, but said there would be a news conference. Stoltenberg is the United Nation's peace mediator for former Yugoslavia. He was Norway's foreign minister until April 1993. Owen represents the European Union. 

On November 2nd, 1993, Norway appears to have opened a back-door channel for negotiations on conflicts in former Yugoslavia, similar to one it used to broker the historic Israel-PLO peace agreement. Top officials from Croatia and Serbia were in Oslo this week for talks aimed at negotiating a cease-fire in the Serb-controlled Krajina region of Croatia. Norwegian officials refused to comment on the meetings, but the self-proclaimed Serb government of Krajina confirmed them in a statement issued in Belgrade, Yugoslavia. The statement said the meeting, which included Krajina's self-styled President Goran Hadzic and the deputy speaker of Croatia's parliament, Slavko Degoricija, was close to reaching an agreement, but the negotiations broke off soon after that. It was unclear if or when the talks would resume. "Accepting the suggestion from international mediators Knut Vollebaek and Gerd Ahrens, the delegation of the Republic of Srpska Krajina went to Oslo to negotiate a cease-fire, cessation of hostilities and establishing of traffic and economic ties with the Croatian delegation," the statement said. "The two delegations reached a high level of understanding on almost all matters of dispute. An agreement on cease-fire, cessation of hostilities and economic cooperation was likely to be signed: " Norwegian Foreign Ministry spokesman Ingvard Havnen said he could not comment on the reports, but diplomatic officials in Geneva, Switzerland confirmed there had been a meeting in Oslo.

The Norwegian government will offer NATO 378 soldiers for the evacuation force that might be mobilized to pull the United Nations forces out of former Yugoslavia, the government announced on August 7, 1995. The Norwegian detachment would consist of a company of 177 infantry soldiers, three Hercules transport airplanes and personnel for traffic control on land, sea and in the air, said Norwegian defense minister Joergen Kosmo.

But Kosmo stressed that he hoped the UN would not have to pull out of ex-Yugoslavia. ''I sincerely hope that the United Nations can continue the operations in ex-Yugoslavia, but if it becomes necessary we will contribute forces to the pull-out,'' he told reporters at a news conference. The Norwegian force would be a totally voluntary force, probably consisting mostly of Norwegians with previous experience from UN peace-keeping operations. Even though the soldiers in the evacuation force detachment would have to be prepared to enter into battle, Kosmo said he was sure it would be possible to recruit the necessary number of soldiers. It would be the first time in 50 years Norwegian soldiers would face a war situation. Norway has about 860 soldiers in the United Nations Protection Force in former Yugoslavia. They consist primarily of medical corps and transportation units. At least 50,000 soldiers would be required to pull out the UN's approximately 22,000 peace-keepers in ex-Yugoslavia.

In August 1995, Denmark, Norway, Sweden and Finland all said they would not pull out troops unilaterally despite the escalation of fighting in Bosnia through the summer and the Croatian offensive earlier this month in the formerly Serb-held Krajina region.

The first MID of RIV914, MID4137 engaged Norway starting with June 11th, 1998. 

20001129-20159999 .5

The last MID of RIV914, MID4343 ended on November 28th, 2000.

The European Free Trade Association (EFTA) is reportedly due to sign a trade co-operation declaration with Yugoslavia. The declaration is expected to be signed at the end of a ministerial meeting on 12 December, 2000, in Geneva by Yugoslavia's Transport Minister Zoran Sami, reported Reuters. The declaration will reportedly go into force immediately and is expected to be followed with more detailed negotiations on a wider pact early next year. The four-nation trade association EFTA comprises Norway, Iceland, Switzerland and Liechtenstein.

Norway pledged to help fund a peace plan for southern Serbia on February 20, 2001 and said it was sending a delegation to the Yugoslav province and the capital of Belgrade to meet officials. The Norwegian Foreign Ministry said this member of the NATO alliance was giving 8.2 million kroner (dollars 93,000) to help carry out a plan drafted by Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Nebojsa Covic. Covic presented the plan to NATO last week, which encouraged ethnic Albanians to negotiate with Belgrade on Serbian proposals for resolving the conflict. The plan envisions a gradual demilitarization of the Presevo Valley, an area of southern Serbia made up largely of ethnic Albanians. Albanian militants have attacked Serb forces in the valley, which they hope to link to Kosovo as part of independence plans for the province. A five-kilometer (3 mile) zone separates Serb forces from NATO-led KFOR peacekeepers in U.N.-administered Kosovo. Only lightly armed Serb police are permitted in the zone and ethnic Albanians have taken advantage of the situation to infiltrate the area. The Serbian plan also offers ethnic Albanians there a role in local governments, but it rules out autonomy. A Norwegian news release said the plan also calls for improving social and economic conditions in southern Serbia. ''The Covic plan is a constructive idea to create conditions for peace between ethnic Serbs and Albanians in south Serbia,'' Deputy Foreign Minister Espen Barth Eide said. ''By quickly and heavily giving support to carrying out the Covic plan, we hope to contribute to the peace process getting the best start possible.'' Norway and its Scandinavian neighbor Denmark, also a NATO member, assume joint command of the KFOR peacekeeping forces in April, 2001.

On March 7, 2002, Yugoslav Foreign Minister Goran Svilanovic has told the media that the Norwegian government has decided to give its contribution to the renewal of the Nis airport, which was heavily damaged during the NATO bombing in 1999. `I have just talked to Norwegian Deputy Foreign Minister Kim Trovik last week when I was in Scandinavia. I insisted that the Norwegian government check whether it is possible to help us reconstruct the airport in Nis. It is an airport which was damaged, and very seriously, during the bombings in 1999, and we have just finished that conversation. He came to visit Yugoslavia and informed me that the Norwegian government had accepted the arguments which I had offered back then, and decided to help the reconstruction of the airport in Nis, which I think is good news not only for the people of Nis, but for all of us as well, because the total cost of these works is around 10m Euros, and it is an airport which could be quite useful when it comes to transport of goods, or to improving tourism, given that Kopaonik main winter resort in the country is near. Thirdly, it is the airport which could be a second best option in the situations when the weather does not favor landings in Belgrade, Sofia or Skopje.

Norway will forgive more than half of Yugoslavia's bilateral debt as part of international efforts to restore the Balkan nation's battered economy, the foreign minister announced on September 3, 2002. Norwegian Foreign Minister Jan Petersen and Yugoslav Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub Labus signed an agreement to clear 93 million kroner (dollars 12.4 million) of Yugoslavia's 184 million kroner (dollars 24.4 million) debt and forgive an additional 5.6 million kroner (dollars 746,000) in interest. "I see the Norwegian government providing huge humanitarian and development aid to our country, and for that I am grateful," Labus said during an official visit to Norway. But he said he hoped more trade and investment would follow. Labus is a key challenger to Yugoslav President Vojislav Kostunica in Sept. 29 Serbia presidential elections. The post of Yugoslav president is likely to disappear as the nation forms a loose union to be called Serbia and Montenegro. "I have quite high chances," Labus, speaking English, said about the elections. "But of course there are still four weeks (left) and there is a huge margin of undecided voters." An international plan to create a loose union between Montenegro and much larger Serbia is still being negotiated and must be approved by the legislatures in both republics as well as Yugoslavia. "There are ups and downs in the negotiations, the obstacle being the upcoming (Oct. 6) elections in Montenegro. When those elections are over I am positive that we would finalize that agreement," Labus said at a joint news conference. He said Serbia accepted many of Montenegro's demands but will not agree to the creation of two separate nations. The two estranged Yugoslav republics began moving apart during the decade of Balkan wars under former President Slobodan Milosevic, who is now on trial for war crimes before an international tribunal in the Netherlands. Labus said upcoming elections were focusing on domestic issues, like jobs and the economy, which he saw as a step forward. "They are not discussing how to change borders, or trying to make a peace with our neighbors. We are discussing normal internal issues," he said. Labus also said organized crime remains a major problem in the Balkans, and he put the blame on ousted leader Milosevic.

Norwegian Prime Minister Kjell Magne Bondevik termed the assassination of Serb Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic in Belgrade on march 12, 2003 a "deep tragedy". "It is both deeply tragic and horrifying. If it turns out to be a politically motivated killing, it shows that the conflicts in the Balkans are still great despite recent improvements in the situation," said Bondevik. Bondevik said it was still too early to tell what the consequences of Djindjic's slaying would be. "We have enough difficult situations at the moment. We don't need more," said Bondevik, referring to the possibility of an early war in Iraq and the Middle East conflict.

Bondevik paid tribute to Djindjic as a "brave politician who desired to bring his country into the European-Atlantic cooperation".

Jens Stoltenberg, leader of the main opposition Labour Party and former prime minister, expressed "shock and deep sorrow" over the Serb leader's death. "He was a personal friend, a friend of Norway and the Labour Party," said Stoltenberg. Stoltenberg said Labour had actively supported Djindjic's democracy movement in its struggle against the last communist regime in Belgrade.

Petersen agreed in Belgrade on 29 May, 2003, that Norway could be Serbia-Montenegro's important partner in the latter's joining of Euro-Atlantic integration processes. Minister Petersen supported Serbia-Montenegro's efforts aimed at joining the European structures and voiced interest in stepping up economic cooperation between Serbia-Montenegro and Norway. President Marovic said that a new spirit of cooperation and trust between Serbia and Montenegro had led to an improvement of cooperation in the region, the Office of the Serbia-Montenegro president said in a statement.

Norwegian police have opened an inquiry into a Serb refugee living in Norway whose extradition Croatia has sought after convicting him of warcrimes, the justice ministry said on November 18, 2003. "Police are conducting an investigation to verify the grounds for this extradition request," ministry spokesman Gunnar Johansen told AFP. The 57-year-old Serb, whose identity has not been disclosed and who has been living as a refugee in Norway since 1998, claims himself to have been sentenced in Croatia to 20 years in prison for war crimes. Upon his arrival in Norway, he informed authorities of his conviction, but the Norwegian Directorate of Immigration was unable to confirm the ruling and granted him a work and residency permit. "He told us he had been convicted but we couldn't find any trace of this conviction," said directorate spokesman Geir Loendal, who tried in vain to contact the United Nations war crimes tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in The Hague.

Norway's defense minister was visiting her country's troops serving as peacekeepers in Kosovo on July3rd, 2006, as talks aimed at determining the province's disputed status are under way. Anne-Grete Stroem-Erichsen is to meet the acting head of the U.N. mission in Kosovo, Steven Schook, as well as province's Prime Minister Agim Ceku, officials said. NATO-led peacekeepers, known as KFOR, number some 17,000 troops and have been deployed here since mid-1999 following the alliance's bombing campaign against Serb forces. Some 800 Norwegian soldiers were part of the peacekeeping force at the time as it took over securing the province that it wrestled from Belgrade's control in 1999. Norway has since withdrawn most of its soldiers. During her visit, Stroem-Erichsen is to lunch with some of the 19 Norwegian military officers still stationed at NATO's main base in Kosovo.

PS-SOURCES: New York Times December 23, 1950; May 14, 1965; September 6, 1966; BBC March 19, 1979; October 18, 1979; January 18, 1980; June 10, 1982; April 24, 1986; September 7, 1992; March 7, 2002; May 29, 2003; Associated Press May 24, 1983; December 13, 1984; November 11, 1987; November 2, 1993; April 29, 1994; August 7, 1995; February 20, 2001; July 4, 2006; Agence France Presse November 19, 1991; August 15, 1995; September 3, 2002; November 18, 2003; East European Markets May 29, 1987; Nordic Business Report December 12, 2000.

MARITIME-MIDS:

MARITIME-DISPUTE:

Discussion:
