FILE: cm365369v11.0.txt
DYAD: RUSSIA/USSR-UKRAINE
RIVALRY: RIV982
DISPUTE(S): MID3559 MID4050 MID4098 

PS: 19911226-19920823 0.5 19920824-19970530 0.25 19970531-20140221 0.5 20140222-20209999 0.00

PS-UPDATE2020:

PSNOTES: 

PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20220303
PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20220303

Territorial-Maritime-Boundary Issues Variables

MID3559 

TERRMID: MID3559 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID3559 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID3559 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID3559 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID3559 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID3559 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: MID3559 from cm narrative, Russia and Ukraine disputed ownership of a fleet of ships after the collapse of the USSR. Here, Russia seized the fleet, triggering this MID. Coded not maritime because a maritime boundary was not being disputed. 

ISLMID: MID3559 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID3559 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID3559 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID3559 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID3559 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID3559 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID3559 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID3559 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID3559 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID3559 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID4050 

TERRMID: MID4050 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID4050 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID4050 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID4050 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID4050 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID4050 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: MID4050 from cm narrative, Russia and Ukraine had been arguing about how to divide up the Black Sea Fleet since the fall of the Soviet Union. Russia seized one of the ships that had a lot of expensive equipment on it. This led to a three-day-long confrontation between Russia and Ukraine. Coded not maritime because this was not connected to a maritime boundary dispute. 

ISLMID: MID4050 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4050 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4050 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4050 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID4050 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4050 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID4050 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4050 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4050 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4050 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID4098 

TERRMID: MID4098 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID4098 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: MID4098 from cm narrative, Russian fighters intercepted a commercially chartered Ukrainian warplane in unspecified airspace and forced it to land. While Russia maintained that the plane was in its airspace, Ukraine denied on many occasions that it was, and issued a protest. Coded not terrritory because this was not connected to a land boundary dispute. 

TERRLINK: MID4098 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID4098 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID4098 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID4098 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID4098 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4098 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4098 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4098 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID4098 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4098 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID4098 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4098 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4098 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4098 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID4425 

TERRMID: MID4425 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID4425 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID4425 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID4425 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID4425 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID4425 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: MID4425 from cm narrative, On May 23, 2005, a marine unit deployed from the Russian Black Sea Fleet attempted to land troops in Ukrainian territory near Feodosiya, Crimea. Ukrainian border troops repelled the violation and the Russian ship left Ukrainian territorial waters. It is unclear what motivated the border violation. Coded not maritime because this was not connected to a maritime boundary dispute. 

ISLMID: MID4425 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4425 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4425 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4425 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID4425 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4425 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID4425 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4425 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4425 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4425 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID4438 

TERRMID: MID4438 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID4438 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID4438 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID4438 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID4438 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID4438 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: MID4438 from cm narrative, A Russian warship located in Sevastopol fired an unarmed missile that landed in Ukrainian territory. Ukrainian diplomats protested the incident. The port from which the missile was fired is located within Ukrainian territory, but is leased by Russia. This arrangement has led to heightened tensions between the two in the past. Coded not maritime because this was connected to a maritime boundary dispute.

ISLMID: MID4438 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4438 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4438 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4438 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID4438 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4438 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID4438 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4438 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4438 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4438 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID4 2002-2010:

MID4425
rivalry=365369 nationa=RUSSIA/USSR nationb=UKRAINE MID4425 20050323-20050323 
 revtype1a=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2a=NOT APPLICABLE fatala=NONE fatalpa=0 lhosta=DISPLAY OF FORCE 
 revtype1b=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2b=NOT APPLICABLE fatalb=NONE
fatalpb=0 lhostb=DISPLAY OF FORCE 

On May 23, 2005, a marine unit deployed from the Russian Black Sea Fleet attempted to land troops in Ukrainian territory near Feodosiya, Crimea. Ukrainian border troops repelled the violation and the Russian ship left Ukrainian territorial waters. It is unclear what motivated the border violation. First day of dispute was on 3/23/2005 and last day of dispute was on 3/23/2005. 

MID4438
rivalry=365369 nationa=RUSSIA/USSR nationb=UKRAINE MID4438 20080415-20080415 
 revtype1a=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2a=NOT APPLICABLE fatala=NONE fatalpa=0 lhosta=DISPLAY OF FORCE 
 revtype1b=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2b=NOT APPLICABLE fatalb=NONE
fatalpb=0 lhostb=NO MILITARIZED ACTION 

A Russian warship located in Sevastopol fired an unarmed missile that landed in Ukrainian territory. Ukrainian diplomats protested the incident. The port from which the missile was fired is located within Ukrainian territory, but is leased by Russia. This arrangement has led to heightened tensions between the two in the past. First day of dispute was on 4/15/2008 and last day of dispute was on 4/15/2008.

MID3 1993-2001:

MID4050
rivalry=365369 nationa=RUSSIA/USSR nationb=UKRAINE MID4050 19940408-19940400 
 revtype1a=POLICY revtype2a=NOT APPLICABLE fatala=NONE fatalpa=0 lhosta=DISPLAY OF FORCE 
 revtype1b=POLICY revtype2b=NOT APPLICABLE fatalb=NONE fatalpb=0 lhostb=
USE OF FORCE 

Russia and Ukraine had been arguing about how to divide up the Black Sea Fleet since the fall of the Soviet Union. Russia sezied one of the ships that had a lot of expensive equipment on it. This led to a three-day-long confrontation between Russia and Ukraine. First day of dispute was on 4/8/1994 and last day of dispute was on 4/00/1994.

MID4098
rivalry=365369 nationa=RUSSIA/USSR nationb=UKRAINE MID4098 19960324-19960324 
 revtype1a=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2a=NOT APPLICABLE fatala=NONE fatalpa=0 lhosta=DISPLAY OF FORCE 
 revtype1b=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2b=NOT APPLICABLE fatalb=NONE
fatalpb=0 lhostb=NO MILITARIZED ACTION 

Russian fighters intercepted a commercially chartered Ukrainian warplane in unspecified airspace and forced it to land. While Russia maintained that the plane was in its airspace, Ukraine denied on many occasions that it was, and issued a protest. First and last day of dispute was on 3/24/1996.

RIVNOTES: 

NARRATIVE-CM:
Ukraine became independent from the Soviet Union on August 24, 1992. 

MID3559 occurred on July 14, 1992. This MID was over the negotiations of who owns the Black Sea Fleet. MID4050 occurred from April 8 to 11, 1994. A conflict flared up between Russian and Ukrainian seamen on 8th April as a Black Sea Fleet hydrographic vessel took navigation equipment from the port of Odessa because Ukraine had failed to pay for its use. "Russia, and the Black Sea Fleet in particular, do not intend to be the only ones to foot the bill for the use of the equipment. This is why it was decided to take it away from Odessa and this caused the Ukrainian authorities to react in an adverse manner," the television reported quoting the Black Sea Fleet press service. It said that the situation regarding Ukraine's debts for the use of hydrographic equipment was not an exception, and that Ukraine's overall debts stood at 17bn karbonatsi. According to the report, Ukraine had completely stopped paying its share of the Black Sea Fleet. Moreover, the report accused Ukraine of levying "extortionate taxes" on the fleet. "By levying such taxes, the authorities in Kiev confirm yet again that the Black Sea Fleet is a foreign military base on the territory of Ukraine," the television reported. Even though the Presidents of Russia and Ukraine recently came to an agreement of sorts on the Black Sea Fleet [BSF] issue in Sochi, it looks as if the two countries are about to embark on a new spiral of their confrontation in July 1995. In Sevastopol, the Tax Inspection Agency has frozen the bank account of a shipyard because representatives from the Ukrainian Finance Ministry Auditing Board were not given access to the shipyards' financial documents. There was good reason for this, the author remarks. Despite the accords that were hammered out in Sochi, Ukraine has not chipped in a single "karbovanets" [Ukraine's legal tender] for the upkeep of the BSF. Adding insult to injury, Russia has been paying out huge sums to Ukraine in the form of taxes, deductions and tariffs. In 1994 Russia's BSF transferred more than one trillion "karbovanets" to Ukraine's budget. At the same time, Ukraine owes Russia almost 81 million U.S. dollars as its share of BSF running costs. If because the bank account of the shipyards is frozen, some one thousand Ukraine citizens face the prospect of losing their jobs. Is that what Ukraine really wants? the author queries. More than that, it is reported that Russians and their families are being hounded by Ukrainian authorities for refusing to pledge allegiance to Ukraine. The Ukrainian media falsely reported that Russian flags had allegedly been hoisted on some BSF ships on Russia's independence day. MID4098 occurred on March 24, 1996. It was another incident over the ownership of the Black Sea Fleet. 

SOURCES-CM: Russian Press Digest July 18, 1992; March 28, 1996; Associated Press April 13, 1994

NARRATIVE-CR:

SOURCES-CR:

PS-NARRATIVE:

19920824-19970530 0.25

Ukraine became independent from the Soviet Union on August 24, 1992. Ukraine was one of the three initial countries that founded the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) on December 8, 1991, but has had serious issues with Russia over the years and has a relatively poor ratification rate of CIS treaties.

MID3559 occurred on July 14, 1992. This MID was over the negotiations of who owns the Black Sea Fleet. MID4050 occurred from April 8 to 11, 1994. A conflict flared up between Russian and Ukrainian seamen on 8th April as a Black Sea Fleet hydrographic vessel took navigation equipment from the port of Odessa because Ukraine had failed to pay for its use. "Russia, and the Black Sea Fleet in particular, do not intend to be the only ones to foot the bill for the use of the equipment. This is why it was decided to take it away from Odessa and this caused the Ukrainian authorities to react in an adverse manner," the television reported quoting the Black Sea Fleet press service. It said that the situation regarding Ukraine's debts for the use of hydrographic equipment was not an exception, and that Ukraine's overall debts stood at 17bn karbonatsi. According to the report, Ukraine had completely stopped paying its share of the Black Sea Fleet. Moreover, the report accused Ukraine of levying "extortionate taxes" on the fleet. "By levying such taxes, the authorities in Kiev confirm yet again that the Black Sea Fleet is a foreign military base on the territory of Ukraine," the television reported. Even though the Presidents of Russia and Ukraine recently came to an agreement of sorts on the Black Sea Fleet [BSF] issue in Sochi, it looks as if the two countries are about to embark on a new spiral of their confrontation in July 1995. In Sevastopol, the Tax Inspection Agency has frozen the bank account of a shipyard because representatives from the Ukrainian Finance Ministry Auditing Board were not given access to the shipyards' financial documents. There was good reason for this, the author remarks. Despite the accords that were hammered out in Sochi, Ukraine has not chipped in a single "karbovanets" [Ukraine's legal tender] for the upkeep of the BSF. Adding insult to injury, Russia has been paying out huge sums to Ukraine in the form of taxes, deductions and tariffs. In 1994 Russia's BSF transferred more than one trillion "karbovanets" to Ukraine's budget. At the same time, Ukraine owes Russia almost 81 million U.S. dollars as its share of BSF running costs. If because the bank account of the shipyards is frozen, some one thousand Ukraine citizens face the prospect of losing their jobs. Is that what Ukraine really wants? the author queries. More than that, it is reported that Russians and their families are being hounded by Ukrainian authorities for refusing to pledge allegiance to Ukraine. The Ukrainian media falsely reported that Russian flags had allegedly been hoisted on some BSF ships on Russia's independence day. 

MID4098 occurred on March 24, 1996. It was another incident over the ownership of the Black Sea Fleet. 

Russia declared on Tuesday September 21, 1993 that it has annulled the recent nuclear accord with Ukraine because Ukrainian officials altered the terms after it was signed by both presidents, and Moscow said the changes mean Kiev intends to keep some nuclear weapons instead of giving them up. Ukraine altered the essence of the agreement by its hand-written changes, charged Russian Foreign Ministry spokesman Grigory Karasin. ''In spite of the protest made by the Russian side-at the top level, too-Ukraine's representatives refused to restore the original text,'' Karasin told a briefing. ''In view of these, to put it mildly, unusual diplomatic practices on the part of Ukraine, Russia has officially annulled the protocol,'' Karasin said. ''Therefore, the protocol on the removal to the Russian Federation of strategic nuclear forces' munitions stationed in Ukraine has ceased to exist as an official document,'' Karasin said. The signed protocol-agreed upon by Russian President Boris Yeltsin and Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk at their summit in Massandra, Ukraine early this month-was altered by the Ukrainian side to remove the promise that all nuclear weapons would be transferred from Ukraine to Russia, Karasin said. The surprise announcement came at a time when it appeared as if Russia and Ukraine had solved their differences over the Soviet nuclear arsenal which they, and two other ex-Soviet republics, inherited upon the dissolution of the Soviet Union. Russia and the West have been demanding that Ukraine give up its Soviet nuclear weapons-something Ukraine has promised to do. But Ukraine has balked at ratifying nuclear arms reduction treaties and some politicians in Kiev have toyed with the notion of declaring Ukraine a nuclear power, at least temporarily, and perhaps partly to get outside financial aid to pay for the cost of divesting itself of the weapons. While Ukraine's latest promise to relinquish its missiles to Russia reassured skeptics, the accord's annulment is certain to stir new fears about what Kiev really intends. Karasin quoted the original Russian-Ukrainian agreement signed by the prime ministers: ''The president of the Russian Federation and the president of Ukraine have agreed that upon ratification of the START I treaty by Ukraine's Supreme Soviet, the government of Ukraine will make sure that not later than within 24 months from the ratification date all the nuclear munitions of the strategic nuclear forces stationed in Ukraine be transferred to the Russian Federation for dismantling and elimination.'' Karasin said Ukrainian presidential aide Anton Buteiko made two substantive hand-written changes after it was signed by both prime ministers. ''The word 'all' was crossed out, and following the words 'strategic nuclear forces' the words 'subject to the conditions of the treaty' were inserted,'' Karasin said. The Russian Foreign Ministry spokesman told reporters, ''In essence, these corrections mean that Ukraine, that is a certain part of the state apparatus, aspires-contrary to Ukraine's international commitments-to retain a certain percentage of the nuclear weapons.'' At the same summit, Russia agreed to return the reprocessed nuclear fuel taken from warheads for Ukrainian nuclear power plants. The Sept. 3 meeting also produced a highly controversial agreement in principle that Ukraine would turn over its half of the disputed Black Sea fleet to Russia in exchange for Russia cancelling Kiev's multi-billion-dollar debt to Moscow-but Ukrainian officials have been backing away from that agreement in principle ever since. 

On October 10, 1997, Ukraine was one of the founding members of GUUAM, an international organization which aimed to curve the influence of Russia in the former Soviet Union republics. The other member statates of GUUAM were Georgia, Uzbekistan, Armenia and Moldova. Uzbekistan later withdrew from GUUAM. 

19970531-20140221 0.5

After years of doubt and tensions, the Presidents of Russia and Ukraine on May 31st, 1997 signed a friendship treaty designed to strengthen the weak bonds between the two Slavic states. The treaty was signed in Kiev, the Ukrainian capital, on Boris N. Yeltsin's first trip there as President of Russia. Many previous visits were scheduled or considered, but all were postponed because of tensions over the future of the Black Sea Fleet, territorial disputes in the ethnic Russian region of Crimea, which is part of Ukraine, and other issues. But now, with NATO ready to expand eastward, Russia is looking to bolster its defense and prove to the West that it still has power worth worrying about. So Russia has quickly made past problems disappear-at least for a while. `My friend President Kuchma and I vow at this sacred place, at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier, that the treaty that we sign today will be fulfilled," Mr. Yeltsin said as he stood with President Leonid Kuchma this morning. He said he would issue strict orders to the Russian leadership that the relationship with Ukraine "is a priority of priorities for us. "We respect and honor the territorial integrity of Ukraine," Mr. Yeltsin added, in an important aside. Many Russian leaders have urged the Kremlin to try to claim the city of Sevastopol in the Crimea-the base of the Black Sea Fleet-as Russian. The Crimea was ceded to Ukraine as a gift from Russia by Nikita S. Khrushchev in 1954. At the time, the gesture was essentially symbolic since both Russia and the Ukraine were part of the Soviet Union, but it has been a matter of intense dispute and antagonism since 1991, when the Soviet Union fell apart. The treaty was first written, and nearly signed, two years ago, and it has not been substantially altered since then. The main points stress political and commercial cooperation between the countries, and it includes a joint statement on the Black Sea Fleet that will permit Russia to operate on Ukrainian territory. It assures the people of Sevastopol that their social well-being will remain important to the leaders of both countries and that the city will not simply become a military annex of Russia. Russia also agreed to write off most of Ukraine's enormous debt to Moscow, which is mostly money owed for oil. But real questions remain about the new alliance between the two states. The first is how seriously Ukraine takes its commitment to Russia. The second is how long the warm relations will last if Ukraine continues cozying up to NATO. Mr. Yeltsin made a big show of promising to defend Ukraine "in extreme situations." But Ukraine has never sought the protection of Russia since it gained its independence in 1991, and nobody in Kiev expressed any interest in Mr. Yeltsin's latest offer. "I think President Yeltsin was ruled by the best of intentions, but there were no requests from the Ukrainian side," Volodimyr Korbulin, Ukraine's top military official said, referring to requests for such defense assurances. Ukraine and Russia have slightly different views of NATO expansion. After centuries of domination by Russia, Ukraine has tried hard to show its independence. Unlike Russia, the country has not opposed NATO expansion. At the same time, however, Kiev had no serious plans to seek NATO membership. "Ukraine is not going to join NATO now, and there are no conditions for that," Mr. Horbulin said at a news conference. Russia and Ukraine have ended the trade war and decided to promote cooperation between themselves at the informal meeting between Presidents Boris Yeltsin and Leonid Kuchma on November 18, 1997. After the break-up of the USSR Russia did not have so complicated and tense relations with any former Soviet Republic as it has had with Ukraine. Russia's introduction of the value-added tax on the goods imported from Ukraine and all kinds of other duties undermined trade between the two countries. But economic ties of the CIS countries largely depend on the state of trade between these two biggest CIS members. The share of Russia in the CIS trade is 45 percent, while that of Ukraine is 25 percent. This means that these two countries play the main role in the CIS zone of free trade. But precisely Russia and Ukraine have not ratified the free trade agreement signed a few years ago by the CIS leaders. Only now do Russia and Ukraine begin to realize that nothing good will occur in the CIS unless normal relations are established between them. Russia has made concessions to Ukraine as regards her sugar export, which saves Ukraine's sugar industry. The Presidents have agreed also that the value-added tax be cancelled by both countries. The trade war is over. Furthermore, the two leaders have declared the all-round promotion of relations between the two countries to be a priority target of their policies. At the CIS summit due in January, both countries will act in concert. Yeltsin stakes on Ukraine in integration matters, the paper writes in conclusion. 

Russia sees its partnership with Ukraine as strategic, Prime Minister Mikhail Kasyanov said on arrival in the Ukrainian capital Kiev for a visit on October 4, 2001. He told reporters that with this in mind, Russia is making concessions to Ukraine on the gas debt in order "to create comfortable conditions for Ukrainian leaders, the Ukrainian government". However, Russia expects a similar attitude from Ukraine, Kasyanov said. He said "Russia is seeking to establish really fraternal relations with Ukraine, because our two peoples are in fact one people". He voiced confidence that an inter-governmental accord on the restructuring of Ukraine's gas debt to Russia could be signed. Kasyanov added that Russia not only accept compromises and concessions on the debt issue, but also resolves its problems. Ukraine is expected to increase its exports to Russia by one billion dollars as compared to the last year, Kasyanov said. Russia already accounts for 50 per cent of Ukraine's exports, he said. Russia's exports to Ukraine in 1999 were 2.5 billion dollars larger that Ukraine's to Russia. Ukraine built up its exports by 45 per cent in the first half of this year, while Russia's to Ukraine decreased by five per cent. "In fact, we have given this billion dollars to Ukraine," Kasyanov said. Kasyanov said he was going to discuss problems in bilateral trade. He said "invalid claims often made by the Ukrainian side far from suiting Russia". Kasyanov cited as examples problems related to the stay of the Russian Black Sea Fleet in Ukraine's Sevastopol, a debate on the Sea of Azov and a so-called zero option accord on the former Soviet Union's debt which Ukraine refused to sign thus far. Russia "is making only those concessions to Ukraine which are necessary for achieving common political goals set by the two countries' presidents", Kasyanov said. 

On October 7, 2002, Russia together with Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan formed a new international organization, CSTO (Collective Security Treaty Organization) which took over from CIS most of the security responsabilities. Ukraine did not join this organization, which was seen too much under the influence of Russia together with the Baltic states, Azerbaidjan, Georgia, Moldova and Turkmenistan. There is no danger that relations between Russia and Ukraine will exacerbate, Counselor at the Ukrainian Embassy in Russia Grigory Khoruzhiy told the press on August 13,2002 on the occasion of Ukraine's 11th independence anniversary. "Neither correlation of political forces in Ukraine shall affect relations with Russia," he said. "Strategic partnership with Russia is a key sphere of the Ukrainian foreign policy." Yet the diplomat noted Ukraine's striving for the cooperation with the European Union and the North Atlantic Alliance. "We see how relations of Russia with the EU and NATO are developing, and we should not stay aside from these processes," Khoruzhiy said. "There is a number of economic problems in the Russia-Ukraine relations, and the recent summit was focused on trade and economic cooperation," the diplomat said. Moscow and Kiev said they wished "to prevent a failure in that sphere, which would be undesirable for both of them," he noted. "Ukrainian Prime Minister Anatoly Kinakh will pay a working visit to the Russian capital on August 16 and meet with Russian Prime Minister Mikhail Kasyanov," Khoruzhiy said. "It is planned to discuss trade and economic relations, in particular, the reduced goods turnover." A large part of Ukraine's foreign trade is done with Russia. The Ukrainian embassy estimates exports to Russia in the first half of 2002 at 17.7% of the total exports of Ukraine, while imports from Russia at 36% of the total imports. Russia and Ukraine "should reach a new level of relations in the economy, politics and humanitarian issues, and the Year of Ukraine in Russia will contribute to that. It is also planned to have the Year of Russia in Ukraine in 2003," the diplomat said. The signs of an ongoing trade war make a poor starting point for the declared year of Russia in Ukraine, the Ukrainian newspaper Den wrote on January 13, 2003. The previous year saw Russia interfering in Ukraine's political affairs, putting pressure on Kiev to join the Eurasian Economic Community and buying up Ukrainian companies, and this year Moscow is likely to seek to make Ukraine even more biddable. The much-touted partnership between Ukraine and Russia is unlikely to deepen as the current rapprochement is largely based on close bonds between individual business and political groups in the two countries rather than on common interests. Meanwhile, politicians will keep paying lip service to the need to lift economic barriers as the trade war effectively continues. The year of Ukraine in Russia has ended and the year of Russia in Ukraine is starting. As far as the year of Ukraine in Russia is concerned, in Moscow it was called "a sociopolitical project unprecedented in world practice, aimed at fleshing out relations of strategic partnership between Russia and Ukraine" (quotation from Russian Foreign Ministry representative Aleksandr Yakovenko). Virtually all officials of both Ukraine and Russia described the project in the best way, unsparing in their praise. At the same time, they forgot to say how specifically it benefited both Ukrainians and Russians, and in what way it differed in this sense from previous years. As far as the year of Russia in Ukraine is concerned, sceptics are saying sarcastically that this year, in fact, is far from the first; the first was probably 1654 when, on 8 January in the new style, in Pereyaslav, the Moscow nobleman Buturlin accepted the oath of loyalty of Ukrainian hetman Bohdan Khmelnytskyy to the tsar. As for the reverse link, it was said that the tsars did not take oaths to anyone except the Lord. Incidentally, preparations to celebrate the anniversary of the Council of Pereyaslav where Ukraine and Russia formed a single state are already under way at high level. Experts, in particular the chairman of the Supreme Council Committee for European Integration and former minister of foreign affairs, Borys Tarasyuk, are forecasting that during the year of Russia in Ukraine "further steps may be expected to yield our strategic national interests in relations with Russia". The year of Ukraine in Russia was typified primarily not so much by the frequency of meetings between the presidents of the two countries. Ukrainian President Leonid Kuchma and Vladimir Putin saw each other just as often in 2001, when the first wave of the cooling of relations between Ukraine and the USA and countries of Western Europe continued. And back then, it was precisely Russian capital, in far from open conditions, that won tenders for privatization of a number of strategically important enterprises of Ukraine. The accelerated march of Russian oil companies through Ukraine, because of the absence of any serious competition, soon followed. A typical feature of the year of Ukraine in Russia was the fact that at the same time it was proclaimed, the final stage of the parliamentary elections started in Ukraine. Moscow representatives-such very official persons as the Russian Federation ambassador to Ukraine, Viktor Chernomyrdin, the head of the Russian presidential administration, Aleksandr Voloshin, and less official ones were not shy in indicating "with whom and why" they were operating in Ukraine. The demonstration of influence on what apparently were purely Ukrainian affairs was not only open, but also deliberate, and official Kiev, it seems, saw nothing wrong in this. It also looked symptomatic that on the eve of decisions important for Ukraine's future-whether to take part in the Prague NATO summit and at what level-President Kuchma had a meeting with President Putin. And the first visit by the newly appointed prime minister of Ukraine, Viktor Yanukovych, was precisely to Moscow (it was a working visit, while his visit to Warsaw was the first official one). Yanukovych, by the way, called the strengthening of the "Russian vector" one of his main tasks as head of government. One gets the impression that it was precisely during that year that Moscow did everything it could to get Ukraine to become gradually more biddable, while retaining the external attributes of its statehood. And this was the Kremlin's understanding of the year of Ukraine in Russia. Meanwhile, the year of Russia in Ukraine will also be marked by the fact that it is precisely this year that there will be real battles in the Ukrainian presidential campaign, and each of the candidates will be looking for Moscow's support. President Vladimir Putin is disappointed on December 9, 2004, that Russia's favored candidate was forced to accept a rerun of Ukraine's disputed presidential runoff, but an agreement to dilute the president's powers will give Moscow a lever of influence in the strategically important nation, a person close to the Kremlin said. Vladimir Putin was to arrive in Ukraine on December 22, 2004 for a one-day visit amid increasingly successful efforts by the Kremlin to boost its influence over this ex-Soviet republic. Putin was scheduled to meet with the country's embattled pro-Western president Viktor Yushchenko and Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych. This is the Russian leader's first trip to Ukraine since the more pro-Russian Yanukovych returned to power after his party won the most votes in March parliamentary elections. Yanukovych, whose support base is in the largely Russian-speaking east, has made it a priority to improve ties strained with Moscow over the 2004 Orange Revolution. Relations between Yushchenko and Yanukovych are tense, as Yanukovych has increasingly challenged the president's authority. Last month, Russia announced that Kiev would see the price for gas imports increase less than its neighbors. In turn, Russian Premier Mikhail Fradkov said the Kremlin would like Kiev to "synchronize" its entry to the World Trade Organization with Moscow. Yanukovych has put on hold a drive for NATO membership that had irritated Russia. Moscow is also pushing Ukraine to join a common economic space with Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan, but Ukraine under Yushchenko's presidency has been reluctant to fully commit. Russia is Ukraine's biggest trading partner, and Ukraine is heavily dependent on natural gas supplies from Russia. A dispute over gas prices earlier this year caused Moscow to temporarily cut off supplies to Ukraine, a shutdown that was also felt in western Europe, which receives much of its Russian gas via Ukrainian pipelines. It was widely seen as punishment for Ukraine's pro-Western policies. Since Yushchenko's election, Russia and Ukraine have also sparred over issues including the presence of Russia's Black Sea Fleet on Ukrainian territory and the use of lighthouses on its Crimean peninsula. This week, Yushchenko expressed hope that the presidents of the two neighbors would manage to find a solution to the remaining disputes. "I am sure that our meeting will be effective," he said. "Ukraine always was and will be a friend of Russia." The Kremlin noted in a statement that relations between Russia and Ukraine have grown stronger this year on the basis of "principles of good neighborly relations, pragmatism and mutually advantageous cooperation." Analysts says the visit show that relations between Russia and Ukraine are improving and becoming pragmatic and less political. But they predicted that none of the really disputed issues would be solved during this visit. "Yushchenko does not demonstrate a desire to adjust relations with Russia. His team does its most to provoke Russia," said political analyst Mykhailo Pohrebinsky. Yushchenko's office has said that Foreign Minister Borys Tarasyuk, considered one of Ukraine's most pro-Western politicians, will participate in the meetings. Yanukovych asked parliament to fire Tarasyuk, which it did, but a court froze the ruling and Yushchenko reappointed him. 

On December 2, 2005, Ukraine was one of the founding members of the Community of Democratic Change, an international organization aimed at promoting democracy, human rights and the rule of law in the region. Its membership reflects an anti-Russian policy, with EU members (the Baltic states, Romania, Slovenia), Ukraine, Moldova, FYR Macedonia and Georgia as members. The energy ministers of Ukraine and Russian on December 28, 2005, failed to resolve a politically charged dispute over Russia's plans to raise the price of natural gas exports to Ukraine. The two officials left late-evening negotiations in Moscow without a deal, but talks were to resume, Ukrainian Energy Minister Ivan Plachkov said. Russia is threatening to cut off supplies within days unless Ukraine accepts its demands to pay more than four times the current price for gas imports. "We agreed to break until tomorrow," Plachkov said in footage shown on NTV television, adding that compromises in the nations' positions are essential. "Of course" compromises are possible, Plachkov said in response to a reporter's question. "There is no way to do without movement and compromises." Russia's state-controlled Gazprom natural gas monopoly says it is prepared to shut off gas to Ukraine on Jan. 1-a major holiday in both countries-unless Ukraine accepts to price increase. Hours before the talks between Plachkov and Russian Fuel and Energy Minister Viktor Khristenko, Ukrainian Prime Minister Yuriy Yekhanurov denounced the Russian demand as unacceptable pressure against his country. About a third of Ukraine's natural gas comes from Russia, and Ukrainian officials say raising the price from the current US$50 (Euro42) per 1,000 cubic meters could cripple Ukraine's energy-intensive heavy industry and impede the country's efforts to boost its economy. Gazprom argues that Ukraine should pay US$220-230 (Euro 186-194)-more in line with world prices-and portrays the demand as a justifiable move to scrap energy subsidies enjoyed by former Soviet nations. Kiev has asked for the increases to be phased in over five years instead of all at once. Yekhanurov warned Tuesday that Ukraine could divert some of the Russian gas supplies going to Europe, calling it Ukraine's right to take 15 percent of those shipments passing through its territory to European markets. Gazprom said such action would amount to theft. Russia cut off gas supplies to Ukraine on January 3rd, 2006, after Kiev rejected Moscow's demand for a sharp rise in gas prices for 2006, thus triggering a standoff between the two countries and causing gas shortfalls in some European countries.Since Russia and Ukraine keep starkly different standpoints on the gas price hike, analysts here say, it would be time-consuming for them to settle the dispute, even if negotiations are resumed swiftly. The European Union (EU) and the Unites States issued statements on Monday to appeal to Russia and Ukraine to restore talks as soon as possible. Russia transfers 112 billion cubic meters of gas to other European countries each year through pipelines crossing Ukraine. Ukraine paid Russia 50 US dollars for per thousand cubic meters of gas in recent years, which Russia says is too low. Last May, the two countries launched negotiations on gas price and Russia's payments to Ukraine for using its pipelines, but the talks stopped short of any substantial progress. Russia wanted the gas price to be raised to 230 dollars per thousand cubic meters, while Ukraine has rejected. Instead, it insists 75 to 80 dollars per thousand cubic meters of gas is a proper price. Subsequently, Russia's biggest oil company Gazprom cut off gas supplies to Ukraine on Sunday after negotiations broke down over the price dispute. Observers here attributed the gas dispute to both economic and political factors. In recent years, the international oil and gas prices kept rising, but the gas transit fee did not rise much. Therefore, Russia wanted to sell gas to European countries west of Ukraine in 2006 at the price of 230 to 265 dollars per thousand cubic meters of gas to offset its losses. Russia insists it is not a high price to demand 230 dollars from Ukraine a thousand cubic meters of gas, as Russian experts estimate the country suffers a loss of 3 to 4 billion dollars for favors given to Ukraine in gas export. Moreover, Russia's gas price for civilian usage is even higher than that in Ukraine, so the Russian government has been under constant public pressure at home to lift the price for gas exported to Ukraine. Ukraine consumes about 80 billion cubic meters of gas each year, among which three-fourths is imported. Economists say if price for imported gas in Ukraine is over 160 dollars for per thousand cubic meters, the country's backbone industries such as metallurgy, chemicals and machinery will risk collapsing, and the national economy will suffer a heavy blow. Ukraine is unsatisfied with the fact that Russia still sells gas to other former Soviet republics in 2006 at a price lower than 120 dollars per thousand cubic meters, saying Russia's price offer to it is unacceptable. Though Ukraine has agreed to buy gas from Russia at the market price, the country required that the price be raised step by step to render a transition period for its domestic companies, which Russia did not consent. In the political aspect, the Russia-Ukraine relations have experienced a strain since January 2005, when Viktor Yushchenko came to power after a re-run of the presidential elections. Yushchenko, taking the country's entry into NATO and EU as diplomatic priorities, has made clear that it would try to join NATO before the end of 2008, which has displeased Russia greatly as the latter fears NATO's expansion would harm its interests. Russian President Vladimir Putin recently asked rhetorically: If Ukraine's leader insisted on joining the alliance, why should Russia pay its bills? Russia is also infuriated by Ukraine's moves in some other affairs. Ukraine has continuously criticized the affairs of the Commonwealth of Independent States, in which Russia plays a major role. Ukraine also gave a cold shoulder to Russia's advocation of building a common economic bloc among the four biggest ex-Soviet economies, including Ukraine. Ukraine, which produces 20 billion cubic meters of gas every year, is capable of meeting its domestic demands comfortably, but some of its big companies have begun to reduce gas supplies to households on the grounds of Russia's gas cutoff, thus bringing about an anti-Russia public sentiment in Ukraine. Analysts say that Ukraine and Russia are interdependent as to the gas issue. Ukraine needs Russia's gas, while Russia has to export gas to other European countries via Ukraine. The two countries, as well as other gas-consuming nations concerned, hope to settle the dispute as quickly as possible, but many believe it isn't an easy task at all. Critics here say, however, it is highly possible for Russia and Ukraine to work out a compromised settlement to serve all sides' interests, as the two neighboring countries have after all to maintain and develop their relations. 

20140222-20159999 0.00

On 22 February 22 2014, Parliament votes to remove president from power with elections set for May 25, 2014. This causes President Yanukovych to disappear. On February 23-26 2014, Parliament votes to ban Russian as the second official language, causing anger in Russian-speaking regions (vote is later overturned). On February 27-28 2014, Pro-Russian gunmen seize key buildings in the Crimean capital, Simferopol. You also have unidentified gunmen in combat uniforms appear outside Crimea's main airports. On March 1, 2014, Russia's parliament approves President Vladimir Putin's request to use force in Ukraine to protect Russian interests. On March 16, 2014, Crimea's secession referendum on joining Russia is backed by 97% of voters, organisers say, but vote condemned by West as a sham. These events starting with decision to remove Yanukovych as President serve as appropriate transition period up until the annexation of Crimea by Russia.

http://www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-26248275

20140318-20159999 0.00

On March 18, 2014, President Putin signs a bill for the annexation of Crimea into the Russian Federation.

http://www.bbc.com/news/world-middle-east-26248275

PS-SOURCES: Russian Press Digest July 25, 1995; October 18, 1997; November 18, 1997; December 27, 1997; TASS October 4, 2001; August 13, 2002; January 28, 2003; New York Times June 1, 1997; Xinhua October 21, 2003; January 3, 2006; BBC January 11, 2003; Associated Press December 9, 2004; December 28, 2005; December 22, 2006; United Press International September 21, 1993.

MARITIME-MIDS: 

MARITIME-LAST-CHECKED: 20141229 

MID3559 not considered a maritime MID 

MARITIME-DISPUTE: MID3559
 DYAD: RUSSIA/USSR UKRAINE 365369
 DATES: 19920714 19920714
 HOSTILITYA: 4 FATALITYA: 0
 HOSTILITYB: 1 FATALITYB: 0

Discussion:
MID3559 occurred on July 14, 1992. This MID was over the negotiations of who owns the Black Sea Fleet. 

MARITIME-DISPUTE: MID4050
 DYAD: RUSSIA/USSR UKRAINE 365369
 DATES: 19940408 19940411
 HOSTILITYA: 3 FATALITYA: 0
 HOSTILITYB: 4 FATALITYB: 0

Discussion:
MID4050 occurred from April 8 to 11, 1994. Russia and Ukraine had been arguing about how to divide up the Black Sea Fleet since the fall of the Soviet Union. Russia sezied one of the ships that had a lot of expensive equipment on it. This led to a three-day-long confrontation between Russia and Ukraine. 
