FILE: cm372373v11.0.txt
DYAD: GEORGIA-AZERBAIJAN
RIVALRY: RIV1030
DISPUTE(S): MID4109 

PSNOTES: Georgia and Azerbaijan entered the international system on 19911226. 

PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20180912
PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20180912

Territorial-Maritime-Boundary Issues Variables

MID4109 

TERRMID: MID4109 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID4109 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: MID4109 from cm narrative, a group of Azeri border guards entered Georgian territory to protect a strategic bridge on the grounds that they thought somebody was going to blow it up. This is linked with drug running and the belief by Azerbaijan that Georgia was not adequately defending the Georgian state. Azerbaijan refused categorical demands by Georgia that they leave (but eventually did). Coded not territory because the countries did not dispute territory. 

TERRLINK: MID4109 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID4109 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID4109 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID4109 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID4109 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4109 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4109 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4109 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID4109 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4109 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID4109 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4109 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4109 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4109 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID3 1993-2001:

MID4109
rivalry=372373 nationa=AZERBAIJAN nationb=GEORGIA MID4109 19961017-19961025 
 revtype1a=POLICY revtype2a=NOT APPLICABLE fatala=NONE fatalpa=0 lhosta=DISPLAY OF FORCE 
 revtype1b=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2b=NOT APPLICABLE fatalb=NONE fatalpb=0
lhostb=NO MILITARIZED ACTION 

A group of Azeri border guards entered Georgian territory to protect a strategic bridge on grounds that they thought somebody was going to blow it up (this is linked with drug running and the belief by Azerbaijan that Georgia was not adequately protected by Georgians). Azerbaijan refused categorical demands by Georgia that they leave. First day of dispute was on 10/17/1996 and last day of dispute was on 10/25/1996.

RIVNOTES: 

NARRATIVE-CM:

SOURCES-CM:

NARRATIVE-CR:

SOURCES-CR:

PS-NARRATIVE:

After independence from the Soviet Union, Georgia and Azerbaijan were joint members of the Commonwealth of Independent States. Georgia, under Zviad Gamsakhurdia, signed a cooperation agreement with Azerbaijan regarding the economic, scientific, technical, and cultural spheres in December 1990. In February 1993, Georgia under Shevardnadze, concluded a far-reaching treaty of friendship, cooperation, and mutual relations with Azerbaijan, including a mutual security arrangement and assurances that Georgia would not reexport Azerbaijani oil or natural gas to Armenia. In 1993, Azerbaijan attempted to pressure Georgia into joining the blockade against Armenia during the Nagorno-Karabakh War but to no avail.

The two countries are connected by several important regional projects, including the "Baku-Supsa and "Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan' oil pipelines and "Baku-Tbilisi-Erzurum' gas line. The two nations are also working on the "Baku-Tbilisi-Kars' railway which would connect them to Europe. Azerbaijan is also one of the most significant trading partners of Georgia.

There have been border talks between the two countries since 1991 over the David-Gareja monastery which strands the border between Georgia and Azerbaijan. This monastery and its churches are important to Georgia as a predominantly Christian country. To hold on to the churches on Georgian territory, Tbilisi has proposed giving Azerbaijan an as yet publicly unspecified section of Georgian land near the Azerbaijani border. "All we need to do is to find a common language with our Azerbaijani colleagues," Georgian Deputy Foreign Minister Giorgi Manigaladze, who oversees the State Commission on Border Delimitation and Demarcation, told reporters in Tbilisi on October 30, 2004. Azerbaijani officials, however, say that they are unwilling to consider the exchange. "There is no room for territorial exchange [with Georgia]. There are no negotiations over this issue," Deputy Foreign Minister Khalaf Khalafov, co-chairman of the intergovernmental commission on border delimitation with Georgia, said at a press briefing in Baku on November 2. Azerbaijani officials say that in the past three years Georgia has twice offered sections of Georgian territory in exchange for recognition of the current border division of the David-Gareja monastery, but that Baku has rejected the offers both times. "This territory [Azerbaijan's part of the monastery] has strategic importance for Azerbaijan. And we have no intention of giving it to anybody," Garib Mammadov, chairman of the Azerbaijani State Land and Cartography Committee, said in an April 2004 interview with the Azerbaijani daily newspaper Echo. "This is a strategic overlook. The whole South Caucasus might be monitored from this overlook very well. Why should we give it away?"

The situation on the Georgian-Azerbaijani border was discussed on 17th October 1996 at a meeting of the Georgian National Security Council after a group of Azerbaijani border guards entered Georgian territory to protect a strategic bridge on the grounds that they believed someone was planning to blow it up, Iberia news agency reported on October 18th, 1996, quoting a source in the Georgian president's administration. It said the group was still refusing to return to their own side of the border "despite the Georgian side's categorical demand to retreat". 

The headquarters of the Georgian Border Troops said, however, that the situation would soon be resolved. According to the agency, observers believe the cause of the conflict is "a territorial claim by certain forces in Azerbaijan to the [Georgian] Kvemo Kartli region". ITAR-TASS news agency quoted Georgian presidential spokesman Vakhtang Abashidze as saying on 17th October 1996 that "complete agreement" on the Azerbaijani troops returning to their own side in a few days' time had been reached at a meeting on the frontier between border troops' commanders from Georgia and Azerbaijan. Abashidze also said the situation on the border had not deteriorated as a result of the incident. Sakinform news agency reported the same day that the commander of the Georgian Border Troops, Valeri Chkheidze, said his service had not heard anything about plans to blow up the Red Bridge. "In any case, such actions are to be coordinated," Chkheidze said.

In 2000, President Ilham Aliyev of Azerbaijan announced that Azerbaijan would give its share of the oil revenues from the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan to Georgia. Cooperation over oil and oil pipelines has been the major area of bilateral relations between the two countries. 

On June 6, 2001, both countries became founding members of GUUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development. This organization is seen as countering the influence of Russia in the region. 

On March 5, 2004, Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev and Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili have praised the high level of bilateral relations between the two countries. At a joint press conference after their talks in Baku, the two presidents expressed their readiness to develop Azerbaijani-Georgian cooperation in all spheres, not only in energy projects. At the same time, Saakashvili warned certain foreign forces against attempts to block the construction of the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan oil pipeline that will carry Azerbaijani oil to the world market. Touching on the problem of separatism in the region, Ilham Aliyev expressed his support for Georgia's territorial integrity and said that both countries' territorial integrity would be restored sooner or later.

There are 284,761 Azeris in Georgia. They are the largest minority of Georgia and comprise 6.5% of Georgia's population mostly in Kvemo Kartli, Kakheti, Shida Kartli and Mtskheta-Mtianeti. There is also a large Azeri community in the capital city of Tbilisi.

PS-SOURCES: 

MARITIME-MIDS:

MARITIME-DISPUTE:

Discussion:

SOURCES: Gibler, D.M. 2018. Militarized Interstate Dispute Narratives, 1816-2010. Langham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. 
