FILE: cm516517v11.0.txt
DYAD: BURUNDI-RWANDA
RIVALRY: RIV1130
DISPUTE(S): MID1361 MID2615 MID1362 

PS: 19620701-19730629 0.00 19730630-19931020 0.5 19931021-20209999 0.25

PS-UPDATE2020: In 2015, Burundi accused Rwanda of backing a coup attempt against it in 2015, and since then, relations between the two countries have been rocky: https://issafrica.org/iss-today/burundi-and-rwanda-on-a-reconciliation-path There are some possible signs of improving relations, but these do not signal an establishment yet of negative peace. The border between the two states is still closed as of early 2022.

PS-NOTES: In the latter period, ethnic tensions from the civil wars in Burundi and Rwanda in the 1990s remain and relations might be worsening between both countries because of expulsion of Burundians from Rwanda, 
accusations of aiding opponents, and ban on food exports, among other things.

PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20220314
PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20220314

Territorial-Maritime-Boundary Issues Variables


MID1361

TERRMID: MID1361 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID1361 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID1361 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID1361 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID1361 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID1361 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID1361 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID1361 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID1361 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID1361 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID1361 from Gibler 2018, Rwanda claimed that militarized rebels from Burundi were crossing into Rwanda and raiding villages. Burundi then accused the Rwandan army of crossing into Burundi and massacring civilians in response. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to militarized rebels in Burundi, within this dyad. 

CIVWARLINK: MID1361 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID1361 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID1361 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID1361 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID1361 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID1361 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 



MID1362

TERRMID: MID1362 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID1362 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID1362 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID1362 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID1362 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID1362 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID1362 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID1362 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID1362 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID1362 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID1362 from Gibler2018, Rwanda and Burundi accused each other of supporting rebels within their borders who were targeting the other government. A number of border clashes between Burundian and Rwandan troops occurred in 1973. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to militarized rebel activity within this dyad.

CIVWARLINK: MID1362 1 -- civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID1362 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID1362 the border clashes which resulted from the militarized rebel activity also involved Tanzanian troops fighting against Burundian troops, and some of the rebels sought refuge in Tanzania, outside this dyad. Burundi troops entered Tanzania to target the rebels. 

COUPMID: MID1362 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID1362 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID1362 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID1362 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 



MID2615

TERRMID: MID2615 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID2615 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID2615 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID2615 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID2615 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID2615 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID2615 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID2615 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID2615 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID2615 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID2615 from Gibler 2018, Hutus from Rwanda crossed into Burundi to assist Hutu rebels fighting there, and Burundi protested, saying that many Rwandans were in the fighitng in Burundi. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to the civil war in Burundi. 

CIVWARLINK: MID2615 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID2615 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID2615 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID2615 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID2615 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID2615 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 



MID4365

TERRMID: MID4365 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID4365 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID4365 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID4365 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID4365 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID4365 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID4365 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4365 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4365 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4365 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID4365 from Gibler 2018, Rwanda reinforced its border to prevent militarized rebels in Burundi from entering Rwanda. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to militarized rebel activity in Burundi. 

CIVWARLINK: MID4365 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4365 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID4365 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4365 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4365 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4365 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 



MID4388

TERRMID: MID4388 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID4388 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID4388 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID4388 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID4388 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID4388 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID4388 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4388 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4388 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4388 2 -- somewhat uncertain
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID4388 from Gibler 2018, Rwandan soldiers crossed into Burundi, which Burundi protested, triggering this MID. Per Gibler and the cm narrative, it is unclear why Rwandan soldiers did this, as they never stated a reason and did not engage in any fighting or raiding. Coded not civil war because although other MIDs in this dyad involve militarized rebels in Burundi and/or Rwanda, there is no indication that this incident was tied to rebel activity. Coded somewhat uncertain because, although we know the events that comprise the MID, it is unclear why this MID occurred (i.e., the motivating issue).

CIVWARLINK: MID4388 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4388 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID4388 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4388 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4388 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4388 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 




MID4 2002-2010:

MID4365
rivalry=516517 nationa=RWANDA nationb=BURUNDI MID4365 20040421-20040421 
 revtype1a=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2a=NOT APPLICABLE fatala=NONE fatalpa=0 lhosta=DISPLAY OF FORCE 
 revtype1b=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2b=NOT APPLICABLE fatalb=NONE fatalpb=0
lhostb=NO MILITARIZED ACTION 

Rwanda deployed additional troops to its border with Burundi to prevent Interahamwe rebels, based mostly in DRC and with whom Rwanda has clashed previously (see MID 10203 and 10212), from entering and attacking Rwanda through Burundi's largely lawless Cibitoke province. First day of dispute was on 4/21/2004 and last day of dispute was on 4/21/2004.

MID4388
rivalry=516517 nationa=RWANDA nationb=BURUNDI MID4388 20060817-20060817 
 revtype1a=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2a=NOT APPLICABLE fatala=NONE fatalpa=0 lhosta=DISPLAY OF FORCE 
 revtype1b=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2b=NOT APPLICABLE fatalb=NONE fatalpb=0
lhostb=NO MILITARIZED ACTION 

On August 17, 2006, Rwandan soldiers apparently crossed over the Rwanda-Burundi border into the Kayanza province before returning to Rwanda. It is unclear why the violation occurred, but no damage to Burundian territory was reported. First day of dispute was on 8/17/2006 and last day of dispute was on 8/17/2006.

RIVNOTES: 

NARRATIVE-CM:
Burundi and Rwanda became independent on July 1, 1962. Burundi provided military assistance to Tutsi exiles from Rwanda and supported their efforts to overthrown the Rwandan government. Tensions between Tutsi exiles and Hutus in Rwanda erupted in violence on November 25, 1963, but tensions were calmed a month later. Burundi refugees from Rwanda attacked and killed 14 individuals in the border region on January 17, 1966. Burundi referred the matter to the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and United Nations (UN) Security Council on January 18, 1966. Tutsi refugees from Burundi resumed their incursions into Rwanda in September 1966. Rwanda accused Burundi of subversion at an OAU foreign ministers meeting in November 1966. OAU foreign ministers requested the mediation of President Joseph Mobuto of Congo-Kinshasa in November 1966. President Mobuto mediated negotiations from November 18, 1966 to March 20, 1967, when the parties agreed to disarm refugees on both sides of the border.

SOURCES-CM: 
Africa Diary, February 28-March 6, 1966, April 23-29, 1967; Africa Report, May 1967. 

NARRATIVE-CR:
Burundi provided military assistance to Tutsi exiles from Rwanda and supported their efforts to overthrown the Rwandan government. Tensions between Tutsi exiles and Hutus in Rwanda erupted in violence on November 25, 1963, but tensions were calmed a month later. 

MID1361 occurred when on January 21, 1964, the Bahuto and Watusi tribes clashed in Rwanda. Roughly 8,000 Watusis had been killed the previous month in retaliation for raids against the government by Watusis living in Ethiopia, Uganda, and the Congo. This forced a refugee flow of about 4,000 people to Burundi.

Burundi refugees from Rwanda attacked and killed 14 individuals in the border region on January 17, 1966. Tutsi refugees from Burundi resumed their incursions into Rwanda in September 1966. Rwanda accused Burundi of subversion at an OAU foreign ministers meeting in November 1966. OAU foreign ministers requested the mediation of President Joseph Mobuto of Congo-Kinshasa in November 1966. President Mobuto mediated negotiations from November 18, 1966 to March 20, 1967, when the parties agreed to disarm refugees on both sides of the border.

I was unable to find information on MID2615, which is supposed to have occurred on October 11, 1972.

Hutu refugees invaded Burundi from Rwanda on May 10-11, 1973. This was MID1362. Protected by Rwandan aircraft, the rebels massacred the civilian population in Burundi. The fighting continued for several weeks.

While this is the last MID listed between Rwanda and Burundi, there is no clear reason for explaining the termination of this rivalry. After 1973 until the early stages of the Rwandan genocide the relations between the two countries were very close. 

SOURCES-CR: 
Facts on File, January 1964; Keesings's, May 1973, July 1973.

PS-NARRATIVE: 

19730630-19931020 0.5

Hutu refugees invaded Burundi from Rwanda on May 10-11, 1973. This was MID1362. Protected by Rwandan aircraft, the rebels massacred the civilian population in Burundi. The fighting continued for several weeks. The fighting finally ended on June 30, 1973. While this is the last MID listed between Rwanda and Burundi, there is no clear reason for explaining the termination of this rivalry. 

From 1973 until the early stages of the Rwandan genocide the relations between the two countries were very close. There were several reasons why the period from 1973 to 1993 was coded as 0.5: joint agreement to develop the Kagera River Basin, joint facilitation for the return of refugees, the resuscitation of the joint technical cooperation commission, and numerous inter-governmental official visits between the two countries. A signing ceremony of an agreement for establishing a joint organization for management and development of the Kagera river basin was held on August 25, 1977, at Rusumo falls on Tanzania-Rwanda-Burundi border. Tanzanian president Julius Nyerere, Rwandan president Juvenal Habyarimana and Burundi president jean Baptiste Bagaza signed the agreement at the ceremony attended by several thousand people. The three presidents laid the corner stone for the organization's headquarters in Kigali, capital of Rwanda on August 25, 1977 evening. The Kagera River runs through Rwanda, Burundi, Tanzania and Uganda. The governments of Tanzania, Rwanda and Burundi have been carrying out studies since 1971 for comprehensive planning on integrated development of the Kagera River Basin.

The Presidents Baganza of Burundi and Habyarimana of Rwanda had met on the 17th June 1979, at a provincial capital in Burundi near the border between the two countries. In their talks, which had lasted two and a half hours, the two Presidents had decided to facilitate the return of Burundi refugees from Rwanda and to resuscitate the joint technical co-operation commission, in an attempt to improve the state of bilateral relations.

The President of the Republic of Burundi, HE Colonel Jean-Baptiste Bagaza, paid a working visit to Butare on 3rd August 1981 at the invitation of HE Maj-Gen Juvenal Habyarimana, President of the Republic of Rwanda. They exchanged views on ways and means of consolidating the age-old relations between their two fraternal peoples. They expressed happiness about the excellent fraternal relations existing between their countries as well as their firm determination to work to strengthen them through regular contacts. In order to further strengthen the ties of friendly co-operation the two Presidents asked their Foreign and Co-operation Ministers to prepare a general agreement of co-operation. They also stressed the interest they attach to the correct execution of the agreements concluded between the two countries and asked the high commission for technical co-operation to meet as soon as possible. They also instructed that various committees be set up to examine in detail problems of particular interest to both countries. Concerning regional co-operation, the two parties noted with satisfaction and appreciation their solidarity within the Great Lakes Economic Community Kagera River Basin Organization. The two Presidents examined the political situation now prevailing in Africa and the world and noted with real satisfaction their identity of views on the major problems now facing the international community. The two Heads of State finally agreed to meet as often as possible, that being the best way of consolidating the relations of friendship and co-operation between their two countries.

The Burundi Minister of Interior, Lt-Col Charles Kazatsa ended his visit to Ewanda which began on 25th March, 1985. This visit culminated in a joint communique signed by the Burundi Minister and his Rwandan counterpart, Militant Thomas Habanabakize. According to the communique the visit comes in the context of the relations of friendship, fraternity and cooperation which exist between the two brotherly peoples of Burundi and Rwanda and follows the directives issued by the two Heads of State at Ngozi on 25th January, 1985. During his stay in our country, the Burundi Minister was received by the President of the Republic of Rwanda and accompanied by his Rwandan counterpart he visited socio-economic projects in the prefectures of Butare, Ruhengeri, Diumba and Kigali. Addressing people in the communes visited, the two Ministers stressed the excellent relations existing between the two brotherly people who speak the same language and have a common cultural identity and history.
They stressed that borders inherited from colonialism must not constitute an obstacle to the contacts and coexistence of the people of Rwanda and Burundi. At a working session the two Ministers reviewed bilateral relations. They expressed pleasure at the signing at Ngozi of the general cooperation agreement on 25th January, 1985 between Presidents Habyarimana and Jean-Baptiste Bagaza. Following their talks, the Burundi and Rwandan Ministers of Interior made some recommendations. On the (ad hoc) commission charged with the planning the common border, the two Ministers agreed that a meeting of the joint technical commission on demarcation and definition of the border should be held as soon as possible in order to find a definitive solution to problems in conformity with the directives given by the Heads of State at Ngozi on 25th January 1985. On border irregularity problems, the two Ministers agreed on a permanent campaign of awareness among the people on the existence and need for respect of (each other's) laws and (directives). On relations between the people along the border, the two Ministers stressed the need for regular and urgent consultations between the border authorities of the two countries in order to discuss and find common solutions to the daily problems faced by the people. They also recommended the amendment of movement formalities at the border in favor of the people living along the border zones, as well as the establishment of a border zone to allow free movement. On cooperation in legal affairs, the two Ministers recommended the regular implementation of laws in force in each country concerning nationals who run away after committing crimes or offences on the other country's territory, and further reinforcement of the daily inquiries at meetings between border administrative and legal authorities. The two ministers hoped for the creation of a special committee charged with security problems in the context of the enlarged Rwandan-Burundi joint commission of co-operation instituted by the general agreement on cooperation signed at Ngozi on 25th January 1985. The two Ministers expressed pleasure at the results of their talks which were held in an atmosphere of fraternity and perfect understanding. 

On June 3, 1989, the Rwandese Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Co-operation, Dr Casimir Bizimungu, on an official visit to Burundi, was received in audience both by the Rwandan head of state Maj Pierre Buyoya and by the Prime Minister and Minister of Planning, Mr Adrien Sibomana. The Rwandese Foreign Minister was bearing a friendly message from President Juvenal Habyarimana to his counterpart in Burundi, Maj Pierre Buyoya. In an interview with the press, after his talks with the Head of State and the Prime Minister, the Rwandese Foreign Minister indicated that their discussions were centered on the current state of co-operation between Rwanda and Burundi. Minister Bizimungu noted with satisfaction that the co-operation between our two countries was good but needs to be strengthened. He also recalled that his mission to Burundi coincided with the holding in Bujumbura of the second joint commission between Burundi and Rwanda, which constitutes a constructive dialogue towards the strengthening of our co-operations. As far as the question of the repatriation of the Burundi refugees to Rwanda is concerned, the Rwandese Foreign Minister recalled that the repatriation process of the Burundi refugees was officially due to end on 31st May, 1989, as it has been recommended by the heads of state of the Great Lake States which are Zaire, Rwanda and Burundi, Rwanda having already announced its incapacity of sheltering those refugees. At the time being, Burundi refugees arrived back home from Butare, southern Rwanda, under the supervision of the UNHCR. But, as the Rwandese Foreign Minister said, the question now is to know the state of the remaining Burundi refugees who refused to come back to their homeland. According to him, more than 950 refugees are still in the southern district of Butare and the question is to find another land of exile than Rwanda, and the UNHCR is willing to help in the settlement of this problem.

On January 17, 1991, the Presidents of Burundi, Maj Pierre Buyoya, and Rwanda, Maj-Gen Juvenal Habyarimana, met in Ngozi Province. They were accompanied by their wives. The Rwandan head of state who was on a working and friendly visit to Burundi, met his counterpart in the framework of good neighborliness and regular consultations which characterize the good relations existing between the two brotherly countries. After the two tete-a-tete sessions, the Burundi Minister of External Relations and Co-operation, Mr Cyprien Mbonimpa, read the joint communique which sanctioned the meeting. The President of the Republic of Rwanda informed his Burundi counterpart about the situation prevailing in Rwanda following the armed attack of 1st October 1990. The two heads of state hailed each other on the various initiatives launched to restore peace and tranquility in Rwanda and the region. On this subject, they reiterated their commitment to the implementation of the decisions taken at the summits of Mwanza on 7th October 1990, and Gbadolite on 23rd and 24th October, and Goma on 20th November 1990. They agreed to do everything possible to contribute to finding a solution to the existing problem and in particular the refugee problem. To this effect, they expressed their hope that the regional conference on the refugee problem, which will soon be held in Zaire and Tanzania, will lead to satisfactory solutions. The two heads of state, moreover, hailed the atmosphere of peace and security existing at the common border. To this effect, the President of the Republic of Rwanda expressed his sincere thanks to the President of the Republic of Burundi, the government and people of Burundi, for the support given to the Rwandan people at this difficult time. Moreover, they informed each other about the evolution of the democratic process in progress in their respective countries. The President of the Republic of Rwanda thanked the President of the Republic of Burundi, and the population of Ngozi Province, for the warm and brotherly welcome reserved to him and his delegation.

On 29th November 1991, the government of Burundi took the decision to declare a member of the diplomatic staff of the Rwandan embassy in Burundi persona non grata. He is the first secretary, Mr Antoine Nkezabera. At previous meetings, Burundi had informed the Rwandan government that the behavior of the diplomat was incompatible with his diplomatic status and that it wished Rwanda to recall the official or simply proceed with his replacement. In retaliation, the Rwandan government has just expelled two of our diplomats in Kigali the first counselor and the third secretary. We take note of the decision and express our regret, said Burundian Minister of External Relations and Cooperation, Cyprien Mbonimpa. It is an escalation in the relations between the two countries. The question which arises and which every observer could ask is whether the escalation will continue. The Burundian Minister of Foreign Affairs declared that he would like to say that Burundi would not like to move in that direction. On the contrary, we believe that the Rwandan and Burundian people would not understand such a deterioration in our relations. It is for this reason that in view of the current circumstances, Burundi would like to show restraint and moderation. We have appointed new diplomats to Kigali. If there has to be an escalation, it will not come from Burundi.

On December 13, 1991, the Burundian ambassador to Rwanda Marc Nteturuye went to Kivu commune of Gikongoro prefecture, in southern Rwanda, where he met Burundian refugees who fled from the troubles which erupted in Burundi recently. The Burundian diplomat seized the occasion to pay tribute to the Rwandan government for its welcome to the refugees. Ambassador Nteturuye invited his compatriots to return home as, according to him, calm had returned to Burundi.

On April 24, 1992, the Rwandan Prime Minister, Dismas Nsengiyaremye received the Burundi ambassador to Rwanda, Mr Marc Nteturuye, who handed him a message from the Burundi Prime Minister, Adrien Sibomana. In the message, the Prime Minister of Burundi congratulated Dr Dismas Nsengiyaremye on his appointment as Rwanda's Prime Minister and wished him success in his endeavors. The Burundi Prime Minister also expressed satisfaction at the Prime Minister's speech on the 16th of April, when he was presenting his government's program. Adrien Sibomana expressed his satisfaction especially over the desire of Dismas Nsengiyaremye to hold talks with Rwanda's neighbors, including Burundi, so that peace might prevail in our subregion and mutual trust might be restored between Burundi and Rwanda. The Prime Minister for his part, informed the Burundi ambassador to Rwanda that he was pleased to receive the message from the Burundi Prime Minister. Prime Minister Dismas Nsengiyaremye and ambassador Marc Nteturuye, at their meeting, expressed their hope that Burundi and Rwanda would strive for peace, unity and the strengthening of multi-party democracy, and cooperate for the benefit of their respective peoples. Prime Minister Dismas Nsengiyaremye took the opportunity to express his unhappiness about the current bad relations and mistrust between Rwanda and Burundi, and declared that he would do everything possible so that both countries might resume brotherly understanding and develop their relations for the interest of their respective peoples. In this respect, Prime Minister Dismas Nsengiyaremye asked all those concerned in the question to do everything possible so that relations between the two countries might be marked by mutual trust, with each avoiding what could bring about bad relations. The Burundi ambassador, for his part, hailed Prime Minister Dismas Nsengiyaremye's desire to bring about peace and good relations between our two countries.

The Foreign Minister Boniface Ngulinzira returned to Rwanda on 3rd May, 1992, from his official visit to Burundi, which he described as having ''contributed to launching a relaxation in our relations'', Ngulinzira was asked by a Radio Rwanda reporter if the Burundian authorities had agreed to discourage the rebel Rwandan Patriotic Front from recruiting in Burundi. He replied that they had stated that they had never encouraged such recruitment and that they had given an assurance that ''Rwanda should never fear an attack from Burundian territory''. Asked about a report that the two sides had not reached agreement on the problem of the Palipehutu (Party for the Liberation of the Hutu People) rebels who, it was said, had attacked Burundi from Rwanda, he said that a memorandum ''recently sent by the Burundi government relating to security problems between our two countries'' was still being studied by the Rwandan government. ''I told the Burundi authorities that if they have evidence concerning the activities of the Palipehutu from our country, they should cooperate with the Rwandan government, notably concerning the attack that was launched around 9th April, 1992. So, generally speaking, I do not think that we can say in this news conference that we did not reach an agreement. I think it is a matter of finding the way of settling what the Burundi authorities consider to be a serious problem regarding relations between Rwanda and Burundi.''

At the invitation of the Republic of Burundi, HE Dr Dismas Nsengiyaremye, Prime Minister of the Republic of Rwanda, paid an official visit to the Republic of Burundi between 13th and 15th June 1992. The Prime Minister of the Republic of Rwanda was accompanied by his wife and a delegation comprising amongst others the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, the Minister of the Interior and Community Development and the Minister of Labour and Social Affairs. The Prime Minister of Rwanda held fruitful talks, which were marked by an atmosphere of detente and frankness and by a common political will to re-establish normal relations between the two countries, with his brother and friend, HE Mr Adrien Sibomana, Prime Minister of the Republic of Burundi. The talks between the two prime ministers focused mainly on current bilateral, sub-regional and international political and economic issues. At the bilateral level, the two prime ministers hailed the steps already taken towards the normalization of relations between the two brotherly countries and hailed the visit as the beginning of a new era in their relations. In the area of security, the Prime Minister of the Republic of Rwanda and the Prime Minister of the Republic of Burundi hailed the results of the meeting of interior ministers on the problem of security, held in Kayanza, Burundi, on 7th June 1992, and instructed the relevant quarters to translate them immediately into concrete action. On this subject, they expressed their appreciation of the conclusions of the meeting of border authorities of the prefectures of Cyangugu and Gikongoro and those of the province of Cibitoke, Burundi, held in Cyangugu on 13th June 1992. On the same subject, the two prime ministers undertook that their governments would henceforth apply with rigour the national legislation and international agreements to any national or foreigner found guilty of acting to disturb the peace and security of either country from the other. Concerning the security at the common border, the two prime ministers firmly undertook to do everything possible to neutralize any subversive element on their respective territory intending to disturb peace and security in the other. Concerning the problem of Rwandan and Burundian refugees, the two prime ministers exchanged views on the search for lasting solutions. They promised each other cooperation and assistance in the implementation of their national policies in the matter, and called on all the states of the sub-region to help in finding a definitive solution to the refugee question. During their talks, the two prime ministers considered at length the armed conflict being experienced by Rwanda since 1st October 1990, and which also affected the economy and security of the sub-region. The Rwandan Prime Minister informed his Burundi counterpart about the approach of the Rwandan government in engaging in dialogue and direct negotiations with a view to solving the political questions which form the basis of the conflict. The Prime Minister of the Republic of Burundi hailed the determination of the Rwandan government to bring the war rapidly to an end, and assured his counterpart of the availability of the Burundi government to contribute towards the efforts aimed at ending the war and restoring peace to Rwanda and the sub-region. In order to strengthen the historical ties of friendship, fraternity and good neighborliness between Rwanda and Burundi and to strengthen the solidarity between the two respective peoples, the two prime ministers decided that exchanges between the two countries should be resumed and liberalized. In this framework, they decided to provide immediately all the necessary facilities to the businessmen of the two countries to relaunch the flow of trade. They also decided that the border be reopened as soon as practical security measures had been adopted to re-establish free movement between the two countries. The Prime Minister of the Rwandan Republic invited the Prime Minister of the Republic of Burundi to make an official visit to Rwanda. The invitation was accepted with pleasure, and the dates of the visit will be fixed through diplomatic channels. 

19931021-20159999 0.25

On October 21, 1993, the Burundian Army staged a coup in which it took hostages the President of Burundi and several members of the Burundian Government. On October 24, 1993, the Rwandan government, fearing an outbreak of tribal violence after the coup in neighboring Burundi, urged its citizens not "to be dragged into ethnic conflict," at a time when a peace accord was being implemented there. Events in Burundi "must not affect" a peace agreement signed with rebel Rwanda Patriotic Front (RPF) in Tanzania in August, the cabinet said in a statement. Rebel soldiers overthrew President Melchior Ndadaye, Burundi's first head of state from the majority Hutu people. Burundi's previous rulers came from the minority Tutsi ethnic group. The ministers said the coup in Burundi must not be used as a pretext to hinder the Rwandan peace accord between the government and mainly Tutsi Rwanda Patriotic Front rebels who waged a three-year war against the Hutu-dominated government of President Juvenal Habyarimana. They called for an end to the "massacre of innocent civilians" in Burundi and urged Rwandans to assist refugees arriving in the country. Rwandan radio reporters said Saturday some 200 corpses of people presumably killed during the coup were lying around river Akanyaru. "The cabinet urges all Rwandans to avoid falling into the trap of the enemies of peace and democracy by being dragged into troubles of an ethnic nature," the ministers added. Rwanda and Burundi have a history of murderous outbreaks of strife between Hutu and Tutsi people. Both communities inhabit the densely populated, highland central African countries. It is estimated that 100,000 people were killed in the violence following the coup during October 1993. The October 1993 violence was only confined to Burundi.

On November 28, 1993, the Burundian and Rwandan authorities were busy cooling down heated feelings. There was the Burundian opinion according to which Rwanda was on the point of attacking Burundi together with the Palipehutu [Party for the Liberation of the Hutu People]. During her visit to the Burundi refugee camp at Nyagisozi in the commune of Nyakizu, Butare [southern Rwanda] prefecture, Rwandan Prime Minister Mrs Agathe Uwilingiyimana issued a denial. She said that Rwanda will never seek to interfere in Burundi's affairs. Rwanda will never tolerate an attack launched against Burundi from Rwandan territory. Rwanda is aware that elements of the Palipehutu are on Rwandan territory, but the Rwandan PM recently requested that these people, who are refugees on Rwandan territory, be expelled if they carry out activities of a military nature. This automatically rules out refugee status. She said that she was told recently that Radio Bujumbura had said there might be an attack from Rwanda. I did not understand how a national radio could say that-in the name of the Burundi government, and I did not understand how the Burundi government dared to make such a statement without asking for the point of view of the Rwandan government. There will never be attacks on Burundi from Rwandan territory. Rwanda is a friendly country, a neighboring country.

The presidents of Rwanda and Burundi were killed on April 7, 1994, when their plane was fired on as it was landing at Kigali, the capital of Rwanda, according to reports from that Central African country and the United Nations. Presidents Juvenal Habyarimana, 57, of Rwanda and Cyprien Ntaryamira, 39, of neighboring Burundi were returning from a conference in Dar Es Salaam, Tanzania, on ways to end ethnic bloodletting in Burundi. Later, this event is considered to have sparked the Rwandan genocide during which an estimated 800000 Tutsi and moderate Hutus lost their lives. Burundi expressed neutrality in the Rwandan conflict on April 19, 1994, and maintained this neutrality throughout the 1990s. However, given the tense Tutsi-Hutu relationship in Burundi, which mirrored the tense Tutsi-Hutu relationship in Rwanda, it would only take a spark for a wider regional conflict, engulfing both countries, to start. 

On June 10, 1995, Mr Sylvestre Ntibantunganya, the president of Burundi, and Rwandan Vice-President Paul Kagame pledged to fight arms proliferation in their region and dismantle armed gangs. They made the pledge at the end of a two-day official visit to Bujumbura by Maj-Gen Kagame at the invitation of the Burundian president. The two men also agreed to turn the Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries, CEPGL, [grouping Zaire, Rwanda and Burundi] into a platform to look for appropriate solutions to the major refugee and security problems.

On December 28, 1995, the visiting Burundian president was hosted at a dinner banquet by the Rwandese president, HE Pasteur Bizimungu. Speaking at the dinner reception, President Bizimungu said that Rwanda has many problems left behind by the genocide, like survivors of genocide who need rehabilitation, shattered economy and a lot of refugees. The Rwandan president said that, in addition to this, the former leaders who are responsible for genocide are still sending infiltrators to Rwanda to kill people and destabilize the country. He also said that some foreigners want Banyarwanda Rwandans to forfeit the sovereignty of this country so that Rwanda can be ruled by the United Nations. The president told his guest at the dinner reception that the Rwandan government is determined to find solutions to these problems. He expressed confidence that forces of evil cannot succeed, however much trickery there may be. President Bizimungu said that forces of evil were defeated when genocide was stopped, because there are some people who are determined to fight on and win. He added that the Rwandan government will always follow the course of justice in dealing with the many problems. People will no longer be allowed to get away with impunity and that the Rwandan government is determined to try suspects of genocide. President Bizimungu said that the situation in Burundi is so delicate that if not properly handled, Burundi may face a similar tragedy like what was faced by Rwanda in 1994. President Bizimungu called on the people of Burundi to be careful and stay away from this tragedy. President Bizimungu further expressed his government's belief in the unity of Burundi, which the Burundi government is working hard to achieve. And he called on the people of Rwanda and Burundi to combine forces and achieve this unity. The president concluded his speech by wishing the government and people of Burundi a happy Christmas and a prosperous New Year. Burundi President Ntibantunganya, speaking at the dinner reception, acknowledged that Rwanda is emerging out of genocide while people are dying in Burundi, killed by their fellow countrymen. He called on the people of Burundi to fight hard not to fall in the trap of genocide. He expressed the wish that genocide should never be repeated and should be confined to the books of history. President Ntibantunganya said that his visit to Rwanda is intended to meet the Rwandese leaders so that together they can find solutions to the problems facing the two countries. President Ntibantunganya called upon patriotic Barundi Burundians to forge ahead and build a peaceful nation despite the difficult time that the country has been going through. He admitted that the problems are enormous but at the same time added that the will is there, and where there is a will there is a way. President Ntibantunganya concluded his speech by calling on the people of Rwanda and Burundi to work without reservation for peace in the two countries. He said that without peace the cooperation and development which is talked about is nothing but a dream. President Ntibantunganya wished a Merry Christmas and a prosperous New Year to the people of Rwanda.

On July 26, 1996, Pierre Buyoya, a former president of Burundi between 1987 and 1993, returned to power in a coup against former President Ntibantunganya. On August 7, 1996, Rwanda's government says it intends to continue trading with the military government in Burundi and will not join other countries in the region which have imposed an economic blockade. Tanzania and Kenya have suspended vital road, air, rail and water links with tiny landlocked Burundi as part of severe sanctions aimed at ousting the military-backed president Pierre Buyoya. But Rwanda's Vice-President and Minister for Defence, Paul Kagame, said his country intends to cooperate with Burundi's leaders despite having agreed to economic sanctions at a regional summit of African leaders July 31, 1996. Burundi's Tutsi army took control and installed Buyoya as president on July 25, 1996, in a bloodless coup. Kagame, an ethnic Tutsi, was leader of the Rwandan Patriotic Front, a rebel group which in 1994 forced out the previous government which had engineered a campaign of genocide which cost the lives of an estimated 500,000 Tutsis. Analysts say Kagame may feel some affinity with Buyoya, Burundi's ethnic Tutsi leader, and be sympathetic to Buyoya's claim that desperate measures are needed to halt Burundi's slide into all-out ethnic warfare. But Kagame denied in an interview on the BBC radio that his country's decision to maintain links with Burundi was based on ethnic solidarity. Kagame said regional leaders had not worked out the mechanism for sanctions, so Rwanda would continue to work with Burundi. The harsh sanctions on Burundi have met with approval from the Organization of African Unity (OAU) which has withdrawn its military observers from the country. South African officials also voiced support for the sanctions on Monday. But some aid workers fear the sanctions may be causing serious problems. Relief food supplies for thousands of needy people in Burundi have been stranded on trucks and barges in Tanzania, according to World Food Program spokeswoman Brenda Barton. In Burundi itself, sanctions have received mixed reactions. While the hardline Hutu leadership supports the measures, the Secretary-General of Burundi's Chamber of Commerce told the BBC the business community was badly hurt.

However, a day later, Rwanda's most powerful political figure, Vice President Paul Kagame, said in New York on August 8, 1996, that his country would join other African nations in putting pressure on the new military Government in Burundi by closing the border between the two countries, effectively completing a circle of sanctions around landlocked Burundi. In Kigali, Rwanda's capital, the Government spelled out the plan, saying Burundi's new leader, Maj. Pierre Buyoya, who seized power in a coup two weeks ago, would have until Aug. 15 to restore constitutional rule or all air and road links would be severed. Tanzania and Zaire have closed their borders with Burundi, although Zaire's decision was unrelated to the new call for sanctions. Uganda, Kenya and Ethiopia have ended flights to Burundi's capital, Bujumbura, in direct response to the coup. Rwanda's action came as Chile, a leader of third world nations on the Security Council, began circulating a proposal to Council members suggesting a plan of action for Burundi involving sanctions (with exemptions for relief goods), negotiations among Tutsi and Hutu parties and the ultimate threat of military intervention. Diplomats from outside Africa have been uncertain what decision Rwanda would make on sanctions, which were announced on July 31 at a meeting of regional nations. Tutsi-led militaries control both countries, and there was speculation that Rwanda would not act against Burundi. However, African diplomats and officials say there are more complex political relationships to consider beyond those of ethnicity. A pivotal role is played by Uganda's President, Yoweri Museveni, who is close to Mr. Kagame, once his intelligence chief. But Mr. Museveni is not a friend of Major Buyoya. Mr. Kagame said that he had not spoken to the new Burundi President since he took power, and he brushed aside suggestions of a Tutsi fraternity that would make him sympathetic. Mr. Kagame, the former rebel leader whose troops captured power in Rwanda in July 1994, also said that he would recommend that an international commission's report on the 1993 assassination of Burundi's first elected President and the widespread violence that followed be released by the Security Council so that the instigators might be identified and held accountable. Security Council members, led by the United States, have argued that releasing the report could set off a new round of genocidal violence in Burundi because some of those involved in the 1993 assassination of President Melchior Ndadaye, a Hutu, were still on active duty in the Tutsi-led Burundi Army. Releasing the report, Mr. Kagame said at a news conference at the Council on Foreign Relations, "would help us know who is responsible so those persons would not be put in place in Burundi." Mr. Kagame, who is also Rwanda's Defense Minister, said he had first agreed, before the military takeover in Burundi, that the report should not be published, but he has changed his mind since the coup, which he said would not solve Burundi's problems. Accounting for the 1993 violence remains Burundi's most important unfinished task, he said, just as bringing justice and punishment in the cases of Rwandans guilty of fomenting genocide in April 1994 was necessary for the healing of Rwanda. Pressure is rising within the Security Council to release the 1993 report and to follow central Africa's lead in taking some punitive action against the Buyoya Government in Burundi. Legwaila J. Legwaila, Botswana's envoy to the United Nations, expressed a common African view when he said that members of the Security Council, of which Botswana is now a member, are too willing to give Major Buyoya some time to take control of an unstable situation. Europeans and Americans have expressed that view.

On February 23, 1998, Rwanda supported the sanctions imposed against Burundi in a regional bid to force the warring parties in the civil strife torn country to talk. Hundreds of people have been killed. Dr. Anastase Gasana, the Rwandan Foreign Affairs and Cooperation Minister who represented President Pasteur Bizimungu to the 6th Regional Summit on Burundi yesterday told Sunday Vision: "Rwanda's position is that sanctions have been effective and they should be maintained until negotiations can take place." "This regional initiative (sanctions) is a very good thing and it should go beyond the Burundi crisis and serve as a framework for the development of our nations and regional cohesion. The summit also observed that there are certain Western countries who are trying to undermine our efforts for regional cooperation", the tough talking former university don told Sunday Vision in an exclusive interview after the summit. He said the summit invited Burundi's Pierre Buyoya to brief the leaders. "He was invited by the chairman, President Museveni to explain the current situation in Burundi. He said there are efforts towards internal dialogue, and appealed for sanctions to be lifted." The leaders asked Buyoya to release former Presidents Ntibatunganya, Bagaza and the Speaker of the National Assembly, Leonce Ngendakumana. He promised to free them to attend the next talks in Arusha under Mwalimu Nyerere. On the resurgence of violence in northern Rwanda, Gasana said: "The violence in which many people have been killed is being perpetuated by some of the 1.5 million refugees who returned from camps in the Congo. It is not political. It is mere terrorism. They are remnants of the genocide perpetuators. But Government has controlled the situation. There is no problem now."

The Rwandan president, Pasteur Bizimungu, and his Burundian counterpart, Pierre Buyoya, have agreed to intensify cooperation between the two neighbors, a joint communique said on April 18, 1999, in Bujumbura. The communique came at the end of Bizimungu's three-day visit to Burundi. It said the two countries decided to organize the 4th session of their extended joint committee before the end of June. Administrative border authorities of the two countries were urged to have regular contacts and study border related problems as well as find solutions to them. The document also expressed the concern of Burundi and Rwanda over the growing insecurity in the Great Lakes region. They denounced the crime of genocide in the communique. In a related development, Bizimungu later told journalists that he ruled out the possible disappearance from the international community of Great Lakes countries of Burundi, Rwanda and DRC (CEPGL) in favor of the East Africa community. According to him, there is no incompatibility between the two organizations. For his part, the Burundian president said he felt that CEPGL had already reached a fairly advanced level regarding the free movement of people, especially with the introduction of the CEPGL identification card.

Three Burundians from the north were killed overnight on 31 August, 1999, following a disagreement over the lake border with neighboring Rwanda, Burundian administrative sources said. The incident involving fishermen of the two countries occurred in Lake Rweru, which separates Northern Burundi from Southern Rwanda. The Burundian victims are believed to have been killed because they penetrated into Rwandan lake waters to engage in fishing. It is worth noting that another disagreement concerning the land border has just broken out between Burundi and Rwanda after about two years of land conflict between both countries. Kirundo governor, Joni Philippetold reporters Thursday that this northern Burundi province recently experienced border problems with the southern part of neighboring Rwanda. Rwandans complain that the Kirundo provincial authorities have unjustifiably displaced boundary stones by several kilometres into Rwandan territory, Philippe Joni explained. After the incident, the Rwandan Foreign Minister alerted the Burundian authorities, governor Philippe further disclosed. The ongoing diplomatic negotiations between the two countries aim to reactivate the joint technical committees in charge of settling lake and land border conflicts between Rwanda and Burundi, Philippe explained. A similar situation occurred between 1981 and 1985 when Burundi and Rwanda accused each other of attrition of the common border in northern Burundi and southern Rwanda, Philippe recalled but ruled out any possible large-scale confrontation between both countries, thanks to the ongoing talks. 

Rwanda and Burundi have agreed to introduce free visas in order to facilitate encourage movement between the two countries, the independent Rwanda News Agency (RNA) reported on September 21, 1999. "Apart from the ordinary transit visa, the Rwandan and Burundian people can get a free 30-day single entry visa in each other's embassies or at border posts," RNA reported. The decision to smoothen visa delivery was reached Monday at a meeting between immigration officials of both countries in Kigali. 

On August 12, 2002, the vice-president of Burundi, Mr Domitien Ndayizeye, boarded a plane headed for Kigali, Rwanda, on a working visit. Mr Ndayizeye told the local press that, while in Rwanda, he will hold discussions with high-ranking Rwandan officials on the issues of restoration of peace to Burundi and security in Burundi. He stressed that Rwanda was one of the neighboring countries that accompanied Burundi in its peace process, all the way until the signing of the Arusha agreement. Responding to a question on whether Rwanda could help Burundi fight negative forces, the ex-FAR (former Rwandan Armed Forces) and the Interahamwe Rwandan Hutu extremists), who are fighting the government alongside the rebels, the vice-president said the Burundi national army is capable of doing so alone. On August 13, 2002, the Rwandan President Paul Kagame said during the meeting with the visiting Burundi Vice-President Domitien Ndayizeye that Rwanda will consolidate her relations with Burundi. "President Kagame expressed Rwanda's continued desire to consolidate bilateral relations with Burundi and renewed government support for the Arusha Agreement", the communique highlighted. The talks focused on bilateral relations between Rwanda and Burundi and progress in implementation of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi. Vice-President Ndayizeye thanked the government and people of Rwanda for their support for the Burundi peace process, and reported on the progress in implementation of the process. He said that good progress is being made, and new legislation is now in place to support the peace process.

The main ethnic Hutu party in Burundi on August 26, 2003, hailed the election victory in neighboring Rwanda of Paul Kagame, a Tutsi, as an example to follow for its own ethnically-riven central African state. "The victory of President Kagame may serve as an example in Burundi, since the Rwandan people, who have just emerged from the nightmare of 1994, elected a member of the ethnic minority," the Front for Democracy in Burundi (FRODEBU) head Jean Minani told journalists. Minani was referring to Rwanda's 1994 genocide in which up to one million people, mostly ethnic Tutsis along with moderate Hutus, were slaughtered in the space of 100 days. Kagame, who had campaigned on a theme of national unity, won a landslide victory in Monday's polls, nabbing over 95 percent of all votes, according to official results. "This shows that a Hutu can choose a Tutsi, and vice versa. The important thing is to have a good platform, and the people will follow you," Minani, who is speaker of Burundi's transitional assembly, said. "These elections are a chance for Burundi, they come at the right moment to dissipate the fears of those who think Burundi's elections will be ethnically driven," he said. "These elections and Kagame's victory will stabilize Rwanda, and Rwanda will stabilize Burundi." Burundi, located just south of Rwanda in Africa's Great Lakes region, is still wracked from a decade-long civil war between Tutsi and Hutu groups which has claimed 300,000 lives. In April, in accordance with a power-sharing peace plan drawn up between most of the warring sides, the Tutsi president Pierre Buyoya handed over power to his Hutu deputy, Domitien Ndayizeye. But fighting continues there, and one rebel group has spurned all peace efforts while talks on a ceasefire between the government and the main rebel Forces for Democracy have dragged along, mostly without results, for months. In both Rwanda and Burundi, the Tutsis are a minority group and the Hutus are the dominant ethnicity.

On April 6, 2004, the Burundian vice-president, Mr Alphonse-Marie Kadege, and his wife, Mrs Ruth Magerano, left Bujumbura for Kigali, where he will be joining with the Rwandan people in commemorating the 10th anniversary of the genocide experienced by that country. Before his departure, Kadege told the press that he would be giving his support to the Rwandan people during the commemoration of the 10th anniversary of the genocide, which cost the lives of thousands of people and yet did not keep the Rwandans from rising again. He said that he would be bearing a message from the Burundi president, Mr Domitien Ndayizeye, to his Rwandan counterpart, Mr Paul Kagame. He also said that he would be going to Rwanda to ask the heads of state present at the commemoration to abolish the ideology of genocide to consolidate peace in the region of the Great Lakes. Responding to a question on whether Burundi would lodge a complaint against those responsible for the strike in 1994 on an aircraft carrying then Rwandan and Burundi Presidents Juvenal Habyarimana and Cyprien Ntaryamira respectively , Mr Kadege said that that was a normal procedure that Burundi should adopt, and that in due course the government could lodge the complaint, not just against those responsible for the crime, but also against all war crimes perpetrated in the country.

Rwandan troops massed on Burundi's northwestern border on April 21, 2004, in apparent anticipation of a possible attack by rebels from D.R Congo, officials said. Civilians in Burundi worried that the build up was a sign that fighting may return to the volatile area, where the borders of Rwanda, Burundi and Congo meet. Rwandan rebels have long-used Congo as a base and have repeatedly crossed through Burundi's largely lawless Cibitoke province to launch their attacks inside Rwanda. "A large number of (Rwandans) arrived and are concentrated at the border now," Cibitoke Governor Benoit Ntigurirwa said. Col. Patrick Karegeya, spokesman for the Rwandan army, said no new troops had been moved to the southwestern border area. "They probably saw the forces that have been there deploying in new areas, it is just a division readjusting its deployment," he said, declining to comment further. But Burundian army officials said the Rwandans were preparing to defend against a possible attack by Rwanda rebels, known as the Interhamwe, the group responsible for much of the killing during the 1994 genocide in Rwanda. Extremist Hutus killed more than 500,000 people, mostly Tutsis, in 1994 before fleeing Rwanda when Tutsi rebels intervened to stop the killing. "According to reliable information, Interahamwe are gathering in the Sange and Rugeje mountains in the Democratic Republic of Congo with the aim to attack Rwanda," said Brig. Gen. Germain Niyoyankan, the Burundian army chief of staff.

On January 21, 2005, Rwandan officials were trying to get Burundi to extradite to Rwanda her nationals that are suspected to have participated in the 1994 genocide. The prosecutor general, Jean de Dieu Mucyo, says some Burundian nationals took part in the 100-day mayhem and that most of them have since changed their identity. "We need Burundi prosecution department to help us in our effort to deliver justice. They should extradite to Rwanda their suspected nationals for Gacaca trials here," Mucyo told The New Times. He said Rwanda was starting with Burundi and would later approach other neighboring governments over the same issue. Kigali also wants Bujumbura to hand over Rwandan genocide fugitives hiding in Burundi, most of whom are said to have acquired Burundian citizenship. Apparently, they enjoy the same constitutional defense as original nationals because Burundi allows duo-nationality. Delegates from both sides met in a two-day meeting earlier this week at Hotel Credo in Butare Province to discuss the issue, but little was agreed upon as the Burundian team said their current constitution (which is being changed) does not allow extradition of their nationals for trial in any foreign country. The complicated part of it is that Burundi does not have a specific law that punishes genocide related crimes. However, Burundi's Prosecutor General Ngendabanka, who attended the Butare meeting, said Bujumbura had the political will and full moral obligation to work with Kigali in tracking down genocide suspects on its territory. "We are determined to hunt down these criminals because my country cannot tolerate them. We are going to launch a crackdown on those that have changed their Identity Cards," Ngendabanka vowed. He said the most viable way of finding out these suspects would be through joint security operations between the two neighboring states. Mucyo said it is now up to the Burundi government to decide on whether to extradite the suspects or to enact a law that would enable Burundi to try genocide related crimes. Both delegations also discussed Gacaca courts and community service as an alternative to imprisoning convicts, and other cross-border crimes. The meeting was also attended by judicial police officers, immigration officers and legal experts from the National University of Rwanda (NUR).

Given the tense Tutsi-Hutu relationship in both Rwanda and Burundi I would argue that despite the small steps towards better understanding taken since 1999, it would only take a spark to engulf the two countries in a large regional conflict. The refugees from both countries in the D.R. Congo could play a major role in the resurgence of the conflict. 

PS-SOURCES: Xinhua August 26, 1977; BBC June 20, 1979; August 6, 1981; May 17, 1982; April 3, 1985; October 15, 1990; January 17, 1991; December 3, 1991; December 13, 1991; April 24, 1992; May 4, 1992; May 5, 1992; May 18, 1992; June 17, 1992; June 3, 1989; December 2, 1993; April 19, 1994; June 16, 1994; December 28, 1995; August 12, 2002; August 12, 2002; August 13, 2002; April 6, 2004; April 23, 2004; January 21, 2005; Associated Press May 17, 1994; April 21, 2004; Washington Post April 7, 1994; New York Times August 9, 1996; Africa News February 23, 1998; April 18, 1999; Deutsche Presse-Agentur August 7, 1996; April 15, 1999; September 21, 1999; Agence France Presse October 24, 1993; August 26, 2003; Panafrican News Agency September 9, 2004; Xinhua December 22, 1995

MARITIME-MIDS:

MARITIME-DISPUTE:

Discussion:

SOURCES: Gibler, D.M. 2018. Militarized Interstate Dispute Narratives, 1816-2010. Langham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. 

Gibler, D. M., S. V. Miller, and E. K. Little. 2016. An Analysis of the Militarized Interstate Dispute (MID) Dataset, 1816-2001. International Studies Quarterly. 60 (4): 719-730.
