FILE: cm541560v11.0.txt
DYAD: MOZAMBIQUE-SOUTH AFRICA
RIVALRY: RIV1155
DISPUTE(S): MID3070 MID2801 MID2800 

RIVNOTES: 

PS: 19750625-19810129 0.25 19810130-19880525 0.00 19880526-19940426 -9 19940427-20209999 0.5

PS-UPDATE2020:

PS-NOTES:

PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20220320
PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20220320

Territorial-Maritime-Boundary Issues Variables

MID3070

TERRMID: MID3070 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID3070 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID3070 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID3070 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID3070 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID3070 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID3070 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID3070 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID3070 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID3070 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID3070 from cm narrative, South Africa and Mozambique supported rebel groups fighting against each other's government. From Gibler 2018, South Africa responded to a terrorist attack from the ANC (the rebel group fighting against their government) by bombing Maputo, the capital city of Mozambique. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to militarized rebels in Mozambique and South Africa. 

CIVWARLINK: MID3070 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID3070 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID3070 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID3070 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID3070 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID3070 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID2801

TERRMID: MID2801 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID2801 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID2801 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID2801 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID2801 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID2801 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID2801 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID2801 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID2801 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID2801 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID2801 from Gibler 2018, in 1987 South Africa launched an attack on the capital city of Mozambique. Mozambique was allowing the ANC, a rebel group targeting South Africa, to have their headquarters in the capital city. Coded civil war MID because this is connected to militarized rebels in Mozambique targeting South Africa. 

CIVWARLINK: MID2801 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID2801 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID2801 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID2801 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID2801 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID2801 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID2800

TERRMID: MID2800 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID2800 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID2800 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID2800 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID2800 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID2800 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID2800 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID2800 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID2800 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID2800 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID2800 from Gibler 2018 and NYT 12/29/1987, Mozambique detained a South African helicopter after it strayed into Mozambique's airspace. The helicopter was searching for wreckage from a downed South African Airways plane. Coded not civil war because this was not connected to militarized rebel activity and was an issue of airspace violation. 

CIVWARLINK: MID2800 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID2800 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID2800 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID2800 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID2800 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID2800 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

PS-NOTES:

In the Peacedatav1.0, the period 19880526-19940426 was wrongly coded on the peace scale as "10" because of a conversion error. It has been properly changed to `Transition," which is numerically designated as `-9' in the data file.

NARRATIVE-CM:
South Africa supported the Mozambique National Resistance (RENAMO) beginning in 1980, and Mozambique supported the African National Congress (ANC). South African troops attacked ANC targets near Maputo in Mozambique on January 30, 1981, resulting in the deaths of 30 ANC members and two South African soldiers. President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe condemned South Africa on January 31, 1981. Mozambique referred the matter to the United Nations (UN) Security Council. Mozambique expressed support for the ANC on February 8, 1981. The Soviet Union deployed two naval ships near Maputo in support of Mozambique in February 1981. Mozambican troops and South African troops clashed near the border on March 19, 1981, resulting in the death of one South African soldier. South African troops attacked ANC targets in Namaacha, Mozambique on August 23, 1982, resulting in the deaths of two Mozambicans and one Portuguese civilian. South African military aircraft attacked ANC targets near Maputo, Mozambique on May 23, 1983, resulting in the deaths of 41 ANC members, 17 Mozambican soldiers, and six civilains. President Daniel Moi of Kenya, chairman of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), and Eden Kodjo, secretary-general of the OAU, condemned South Africa on May 23, 1983. South African troops attacked ANC targets in Maputo on October 17, 1983. Britain condemned South Africa on October 17, 1983. Egypt, Tunisia, Lesotho, Tanzania, and Zimbabwe condemned South Africa on October 18, 1983. Mozambique and South Africa signed the United States-mediated Nkomato Accords on March 16, 1984, which provided for an end to South African support of RENAMO activities and a reduction in ANC presence in Mozambique. South African support of RENAMO continued through 1985. Foreign Minister Pik Botha of South Africa admitted that South Africa had violated the Nkomato Accords on September 18, 1985.

SOURCES-CM: 
Sources: Africa Research Bulletin (ARB), January 1-31, 1981, February 1-28, 1981, March 1-31, 1981, May 1-31, 1983, October 1-31, 1983; Brecher and Wilkenfeld, 1997, 460; Degenhardt, 1988, 326-337; Keesing, December 1983.

NARRATIVE-CR:
Mozambique became an independent state on June 25, 1975, after being part of the Portuguese empire. The Front for the Liberation of Mozambique (Frelimo) came into power at this time and aligned itself with the Soviet Union as a Marxist state. Immediately, Frelimo showed hostility to the governments of South Africa and Rhodesia, and cut off Rhodesia's railway. The response was the development of the Mozambique National Resistance Organization (Renamo) in 1976.

Mozambique announced its support for the ANC, which was fighting against apartheid in South Africa from the beginning. South Africa in turn supported Renamo in its fight against the government of Mozambique. Support for these rebel groups formed the basis for the ensuing disputes during the 1980s. While Mozambique and South Africa signed the Nkomati accord in 1984, which provided that Mozambique would end all support of the ANC and South Africa would end all support of Renamo, this did not turn out to be the case in reality. Incursions across the border and other forms of support continued after this point.

South African troops attacked ANC targets near Maputo in Mozambique on January 30, 1981, resulting in the deaths of 30 ANC members and two South African soldiers. Mozambican troops and South African troops clashed near the border on March 19, 1981, resulting in the death of one South African soldier. South African commandos crossed into Mozambique in a daring night raid on January 30, 1981, smashing a black nationalist headquarters and killing several guerrilla commanders, South Africa's defense chief announced. The attack, the first known South African military raid into neighboring Mozambique, was confirmed in a military communique from Mozambique reporting several killed, including one Portuguese national. A diplomatic source in Maputo, capital of Mozambique, a former Portuguese colony, said the attackers used rockets, mortars and automatic weapons in the 2 a.m. attack and spoke of seeing the bodies of six guerrillas, some with their ears cut off. A Radio Mozambique broadcast Friday night quoted a Mozambican general identified only as Nguza, as saying the raid was "a murderous deed carried out against refugees" and a violation of international law. Gen. Constand Viljoen, chief of South African defense forces, refused to provide details of the 40-mile assault to strike at the outskirts of Mapouto. He said the attack was aimed at the African National Congress, ANC, a group that seeks to overthrow the South Africa's white-minority government.

A statement by the defense forces said the attack followed information that Maputo "is used as a springboard for terror against South Africa." Viljoen said the "targets were completely destroyed and numerous ANC terrorists, including senior commanders, killed in the attack." His statement said weapons and sabotage equipment were seized. Viljoen's statement mentioned no South African casualties, but the Portuguese national news agency said one member of the strike force was killed. The agency said the slain Portuguese, identified as Jose Antonio Ramos, was caught in a cross fire between the South African commandos and ANC members. The agency reported five ANC members killed in the assault on an ANC house in the suburb of Matola, 10 miles northwest of the capital. A diplomatic source in Maputo, reached by telephone, said he saw six other dead ANC members in two other houses. He said some of the dead guerrillas had their ears cut off. The Portuguese news agency said Mozambican soldiers and armored cars rushed to the scene of the attack, but arrived too late. In Washington, State Department spokesman William Dyess said if reports of the attacks were true, "it's unfortunate." He said the department would have no further comment immediately. Mozambique became independent in 1975 under the Marxist government of President Samora Machel. The South African raid followed by two days Prime Minister P.W. Botha's announcement of a general election. The raid, Botha's announcement Wednesday of the capture of a Soviet spy in South Africa and his government's refusal to accept a U.N. plan for independence for South-West Africa, all are likely to be seen here as proof of his determination to oppose communism. In announcing the election, set for April 29, Botha said the "total onslaught" against his country by Marxists and others opposed to apartheid would be the main issue in the balloting. Apartheid is the rigid system of racial separation imposed here since 1948. While it was not clear how the South Africans penetrated Mozambique, their units have had practice at cross-border raids in Zambia and Angola. Up to now, Mozambique has never accused South Africa of a direct attack, although South Africa has repeatedly been accused of supporting the shadowy anti-government Mozambican National Resistance Movement. South Africa has accused Mozambique of allowing the ANC to launch incursions into South Africa. President Machel has said he supported the aims of the ANC, but denied allowing them to launch attacks from his soil. The South African military attributed a string of guerrilla attacks in South Africa on Mozambique-based guerrillas, including a major attack on oil refineries and an attack on a bank in suburban Pretoria, both in 1980. But relations between the two countries have always been tempered by their mutual economic interests, although they maintain no official diplomatic relations. Thousands of Mozambicans work in South Africa's gold mines, and South Africans hold key advisory jobs in the Mozambican railways and harbors. Also important, the Cabora Bassa dam in Mozambique is a critical unit in South Africa's electrical supply system.

On February 7, 1981, the South African Foreign Minister, Mr Roelof Botha, has told the Secretary General of the United Nations, Dr Waldheim, that his country is committed to act against the threat terrorism poses to its people whether the attacks originate within South Africa or in a neighboring country. In a letter dealing with the attack by the South African Defense Force on hideouts of the African National Congress in and around Maputo in Mozambique last weekend, Mr Botha says a country which actively or passively exports terrorism and subversion and harbors terrorists will have to bear the consequences. Mr Botha said Mozambique had been warned that unless steps were taken to put an end to terrorist activities South Africa would be forced to take appropriate steps. In his letter the Foreign Minister points out that the raid on Maputo was directed solely at ANC terrorists and that everything possible was done to avoid contact with Mozambican troops and civilians. South Africa had evidence that attacks on an industrial installation and on public buildings in South Africa, as well as the holding of hostages in a bank, had been planned and launched from the ANC premises in Maputo. The time had come for the countries co-operating with the terrorists to make a clear choice between constructive development and violent destruction. South Africa was ready to co-operate with and assist those wanted to develop their countries and in promoting peace and stability.

On December 11, 1981, a major highway in Mozambique was cut, and a bridge and a vital oil pipeline attached to it were blasted into the muddy Pungue by saboteurs. Just downstream, a railway bridge is out of action, another casualty of clandestine warfare rippling through Mozambique. Fifty kilometres to the east, the Indian Ocean port of Beira, of strategic importance to the southern African region but of little use without rail and road links with its hinterland, is recovering from a night commando assault on its navigational system. Mozambique and its black neighbors blame South Africa for the attacks and accuse the Pretoria Government of trying to strangle at birth their attempts to achieve economic independence. The white-ruled republic denies the charge, but the recent attempted coup in the Seychelles has reinforced black Africans' belief that South Africa is trying to destabilize the area. Zimbabwe Prime Minister Robert Mugabe declared after white mercenaries from South Africa had been beaten off from the Seychelles: 'A rabid racist regime (has) gone wild in our neighborhood . . . .' Mozambique is of particular importance to eight other black nations of southern Africa-Zimbabwe, Zambia, Botswana, Malawi, Tanzania, Lesotho, Swaziland and Angola. They have joined Mozambique in the Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference, a rudimentary economic community aimed at gradually reducing their reliance on wealthier countries, particularly South Africa. Six of the SADCC nations are landlocked and depend on South Africa's railways, roads and ports for their trade routes. Mozambique ports offer those countries the only viable alternative to independence on the white regime to the south. Few economic analysts and diplomats in the area believe the SADCC can succeed unless Mozambique's ports and transportation networks are secure and working peacefully. 'The development of Beira is vital to the region," said Rui Fonseca, director of Beira port. "South Africans intend to stop it. If we succeed, we will take a lot of business from South Africa.' The Mozambique Government is being attacked by rebels of the Mozambique National Resistance, a shadowy organization said by black governments to be equipped, trained and directed by South Africa. Western diplomats in Salisbury and Maputo say they do not seriously doubt South Africa's involvement, despite its repeated denials. 'There is strong circumstantial evidence of South African involvement,' one diplomat said. 'Afrikaans writing was stenciled on the side of unused crates of ammunition captured by the Mozambicans, for example.' The MNR, supported by the former white regime in Rhodesia during its war against nationalist guerrillas based in Mozambique, operates over large areas of central Mozambique, according to diplomatic sources. Estimates of its total strength range up to 12,000 men, but most of the sources agree on about 4,000 operating at any one time. The diplomats rate the movement largely as a bandit force, an irritant to the Mozambique Government rather than a threat. Mozambique President Samora Machel accused South Africa earlier this year of seeking to maintain white minority rule in the region through support for surrogates-the Rhodesians and former Portuguese colonial forces. 'It (South Africa) violates our air, land and sea borders," Mr. Machel said. "It infiltrates agents, spies and saboteurs, some by parachute. It forges money, prints pamphlets and distributes them by air, along rivers and by sea.' Western diplomats say they believe the Pungue River and Beira raids indicate the involvement of a sophisticated military apparatus unlikely to have been created by a force of bush rebels without outside aid. At Beira port, Mr. Fonseca said 10 of the 12 giant buoys marking the artificial channel leading into the harbor from the ocean were sunk in a series of explosions on Nov. 12. Explosives on two buoys failed to go off, he said, adding: 'We know the explosives were made in South Africa.' He and Western diplomats said the buoys were 30 to 40 kilometres out to sea and that skilled navigation would be required to pinpoint them. 'We think the attack could have been carried out by a submarine using small boats or a very fast gunboat-type of vessel,' Mr. Fonesca said. The road bridge here on the Pungue River appeared to have been expertly blown on the night of Oct. 29. Charges had been placed along the western bank of the river, where a 100-metre span of concrete suspended from an arch of steel girders met the roadway. The explosion neatly severed road and bridge, sending the arch into the river, dragging its attached oil pipeline with it. The 300-kilometre pipe from Beira to the eastern Zimbabwe town of Umtali, closed since sanctions were applied to rebel Rhodesia in 1966, was due to have reopened this month, ending Zimbabwe's reliance on South Africa for most of its fuel. Experts say the attack has delayed the reopening by at least a month-and has also underlined the fragility of the lifeline. Engineers from Companhia do Pipeline Mocambique-Zimbabwe, owned by the British multinational company Lonrho, are working furiously to lay a new section of line 80 metres upstream from the wrecked bridge, encasing it in concrete below the river bed. One worker estimated it would take until almost the end of December to complete the job if the weather remained dry. But the rains of the southern hemisphere summer are to start at any time now. A group of guerrillas was surprised trying to blow up the Beira-Zimbabwe railway line inside Mozambique on Oct. 14 and six saboteurs were
killed, according to Mozambique's official news agency, AIM. Local reporters said they had seen evidence that one of the dead men was white. His body was blown to pieces by his own explosives and he carried a notebook indicating he was writing of his experiences with the British Army in Northern Ireland. No official confirmation of the report was available.

On April 6, 1982, the Mozambican President Samora Machel held an unusual "pot luck" dinner for the diplomatic representatives of the Big Five nations recently. Each envoy brought something representing his country's culture. The American contribution was Lionel Hampton jazz tapes, the Chinese brought their cuisine and a chef to prepare it, while Britain, France and the Soviet Union provided scotch, champagne and vodka, respectively. Machel provided the country's specialty, giant prawns. The strange three-hour "dinner of peace," however, was deadly serious for Mozambique, a southern African country whose people are among the world's poorest. Machel asked East and West, which often pursue opposing policies in the area, to join in rescuing Mozambique from a hidden war that he believes is stage-managed by South Africa. The expanding war against insurgents of the South African-supported Mozambique National Resistance (MNR) threatens to engulf the country's economy. All of black-ruled southern Africa has a stake in the hostilities. The destabilization of Mozambique is dealing a serious setback to joint efforts by nine nations with more than 60 million population to develop their economies and end their reliance on South Africa, the white-minority-ruled powerhouse that they cannot live with or without. For five of the countries, Mozambique's railways and ports provide the only alternative to routing imports and exports through South Africa. Most of the attention in southern Africa is focused on the other side of the continent, where South African forces have occupied a chunk of Angola larger than Maryland for almost two years as part of the complex maneuvering over independence for Namibia, the last colony in Africa. In Angola, the confrontation has all the brutality of modern warfare, employing jets, helicopters, tanks, missiles and long-range artillery. On the Indian Ocean coast, however, the confrontation between black and white Africa across the Limpopo River frontier has a different quality. The struggle between Machel's Marxist government and the MNR is a hidden war that only surfaces occasionally in the overseas press when a foreign technician is kidnapped or vital oil storage facilities or railway lines are destroyed. There are few set-piece battles and no front lines in the hidden war that now affects all but one of Mozambique's 10 provinces. The evidence is rather in the form of shot-up vehicles, burned-out stores and mutilated people with ears, lips or breasts cut off as the rebels pursue a policy of economic sabotage and instilling fear into the people, according to the Machel government. In such hostilities, casualties are hard to measure. By standards of modern warfare they are low, perhaps fewer than 2,000 killed, but the toll is increasing rapidly. One western diplomat estimated that more than 500 combatants were killed last year, as well as many civilians. More than two dozen foreigners have been kidnapped, some held for as long as eight months, and six Portuguese have been killed. Machel is in no apparent danger of being overthrown, but the resistance has caused severe problems to a shaky economy already plagued by underdevelopment, drought and mismanagement. Travel is dangerous in many parts of the country, and distribution of consumer goods has been disrupted. The MNR, which is believed to have about 10,000 guerrillas in the country, has not proclaimed any specific ideology. Its raison d'etre seems mainly to oppose Machel's Marxist government with a vague appeal to capitalism and to a return to more traditional ways, such as polygamy and tribal chieftainship. The unpopularity of some government measures in rural areas, including grouping people in communal villages and socialization of the distribution system which has caused shortages, has provided some fertile ground for MNR recruitment.

"There is no evidence of people rallying to support the MNR," a western diplomat said. "Nor are many in the rural areas particularly attracted by the government" now that the fervor of independence eight years ago has faded. Recently, however, Mozambican emotions have reached a danger point in areas hit by sabotage and brutalities. Seven MNR prisoners were shot by firing squads in public executions in January as crowds cheered and carried the presiding officials, including Foreign Minister Joaquim Chissano, on their shoulders. Five handcuffed foreigners were hauled before a crowd of 10,000 in Beira and accused of sabotaging the port's oil storage tanks as spectators shouted, "Kill them!"

To the nations of southern Africa, this war is part of a massive South African campaign to destabilize its neighbors to prevent successful black rule from providing a positive example to its powerless black majority. They cite the occupation of southern Angola, support for the MNR, attacks on Lesotho and economic pressure on Zimbabwe. The pressure is most direct in Angola and Lesotho, where South African troops are used and insurgent organizations are believed to receive support from Pretoria. South African policy is more subtle toward Zimbabwe, where destabilization activities could lead to charges from the West that Pretoria is nullifying the vast amount of economic assistance being poured in. By using the MNR as surrogates, South Africa's policy toward Mozambique seems to fall between these extremes. South Africa sharply denies all charges of destabilization in the area. In a recent interview with The New York Times, Prime Minister Pieter W. Botha called the accusations "another stunt by Marxist forces," but he added, "If fellow Africans are threatened by the evils of communism, we shall assist them when our assistance is requested." Defense Minister Magnus Malan came close to acknowledging an active role in a speech to Parliament. The government, he said, would use any methods to fight its enemies in neighboring countries, "even if it would mean we would support anticommunist movements like MNR and UNITA," the Angolan rebels. The government accuses Mozambique of harboring guerrillas of the African National Congress and allowing them to infiltrate across the border into South Africa. The ANC, which is outlawed in South Africa, seeks to establish black-majority rule, by force if necessary. Foreign Minister Pik Botha, Malan and top military officials all declined to have interviews with The Washington Post about the MNR. No western diplomat interviewed in Maputo questioned South Africa's involvement with the Mozambican resistance. "Everybody takes for granted South African support for the MNR," one ambassador said. The United States, which has the warmest relations with South Africa of the major western countries, has joined in the criticism. The State Department said the MNR "receives the bulk of its support from South Africa." Chester A. Crocker, assistant secretary of state for African affairs, told South African officials of U.S. concern over destabilization in the area late last year. Mozambique, a sparsely populated country twice the size of California and bordering on six nations, has scarcely experienced peace since gaining independence in June 1975 after a 10-year guerrilla war waged by the Marxist Front for the Liberation of Mozambique (Frelimo) against Portugal, the colonial power. Frelimo's victory wrote the deathknell for the white-minority government in neighboring Rhodesia, now Zimbabwe. Mozambique cut off access to its ports and supported guerrillas led by Robert Mugabe, now Zimbabwe's prime minister, in their fight for majority rule. In response, the Rhodesian government began a surrogate war that continues to this day by establishing the MNR from among blacks and whites who fled Mozambique at independence. With Mugabe's election in 1980 the operation, including a radio station called Voice of Free Africa, was moved to South Africa. MNR recruits are reportedly trained at a South African military base in Palaborwa, a copper mining town in the bush about 60 miles west of Kruger National Park, through which they infiltrate Mozambique. Brig. Jan Klopper, director of operations at the base, told correspondents on a brief tour there in December, "I know of no assistance whatsoever to the Mozambique National Resistance Movement." However, South African goods have been discovered at MNR bases captured by Mozambican troops and residents of border towns have told of white Afrikaans-speaking troops being involved in attacks, according to the Mozambican news agency.

Two former MNR guerrillas captured by the Mozambican Army, Samuel Agostinho Madanze, 32, and Nassone Francisco Mabunda, 21, gave numerous details of their training "by Boers" at bases in South Africa. Because of the remote training areas, South Africa has "deniability but no credibility," one analyst said.

The resistance movement is led by Afonso Dhlakama, a black who was expelled from Frelimo in a 1974 anticorruption drive, and Orlando Christina, a Portuguese. Both are believed to live in South Africa, but announcements of kidnapings or battles are usually made in Lisbon by Evo Fernandes, who is in charge of MNR publicity. Apparently a key aim of South Africa in supporting the MNR is to pressure Mozambique to put a hold on the ANC. The demand reportedly was spelled out in a meeting in December between South African Foreign Minister Botha and Mozambican Security Minister Maj. Gen. Jacinto Veloso in the South African border town of Komatipoort, the first time a member of the ruling Politburo has openly met with a senior South African official. "The quid pro quo is there-there's a linkage between South African support for MNR and ANC activities," a western diplomat privy to the talks said. Mozambique seems to be responding. Lennox Lagu, the ANC representative here, said, "There are very serious limitations on ANC activities in Mozambique. None of South Africa's neighbors will give the kind of support to ANC that Tanzania gave Frelimo during its war or Mozambique gave ZANU," Mugabe's guerrilla organization. "There are no radio broadcasts from Mozambique and no cross-border raids like ZANU did," he added. The Mozambican Army, however, has little ability to monitor ANC activities in the mainly desolate border area, lending credence to South African charges of infiltration, particularly through Swaziland, which borders on both countries.

Lagu said ANC attacks on strategic facilities in South Africa are carried out by members living in the country. "The Mozambican government used to talk more specifically about ANC," Lagu said. "Now they mention the liberation struggles in general instead of ANC." He said there are far fewer than 100 ANC members permanently living in Mozambique. Most refugees, he said, are moved quickly to ANC offices in Lusaka, Zambia, or Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, a safer distance from South Africa. Both Lagu and fellow ANC member Indris Naidoo openly admit that the South Africans have infiltrated their organization and know exactly what ANC is doing in Mozambique. Thus, they say, Pretoria knows there are no ANC bases in the country, despite its charges to the contrary. "The Mozambican government knows," Naidoo said, that "even if it asked ANC to leave, South Africa would continue to support the MNR." Pretoria, according to that theory, has a longer-run investment in the Mozambican rebels-maintaining the dependence of black southern Africa on it for trade and transport and thus making the price prohibitive for supporting foes of the apartheid government. The hidden war already has drawn troops from two neighboring countries, Zimbabwe and Tanzania.
About 1,500 Zimbabwean soldiers are based along the vital 188-mile oil pipeline that runs from Beira to Mutare in eastern Zimbabwe. Diplomats say as many as 200 Tanzanian troops are here to train Mozambican senior enlisted men. Of more importance to the United States is an estimate by western diplomats that about 800 to 1,000 Soviet, East German and Cuban military and security advisers are in the country. About 15 North Korean soldiers were seen attending a Machel rally in Chibuto in Gaza Province recently. Nevertheless, Mozambique recently has been seeking to broaden its friendships beyond the Soviet Bloc and there has been a noticeable warming toward Western Europe and the United States. After an icy beginning when Mozambique expelled alleged CIA agents two years ago, the Reagan administration is moving toward appointing an ambassador to the country for the first time since 1980, an American diplomat said. The hidden war could put that opening toward the West at peril. If the conflict worsens, Mozambique would undoubtedly have to turn once more to the East for increased military help, polarizing southern Africa along East-West lines. "If international measures are not taken to stop South Africa from escalating its aggression, Mozambique, in the long run, may require more and more military assistance from the socialist countries," Foreign Minister Chissano said in an American magazine interview.

"We are in a real war, and this war may escalate and intensify in such a way that we may be forced to lean to one side and not be as nonaligned as some countries want to see us," he said. "We know that only the socialist countries are supporting us against South African aggression." Only the West can apply diplomatic pressure to South Africa. The East, which has no relations with Pretoria, can provide arms and, in a worst-case scenario, Cuban troops to Mozambique. That could lead to a direct confrontation with South Africa, like in Angola. For President Machel, who has spent the past two decades first fighting the Portuguese for independence and then defending his soil against Rhodesian and South African forces and their surrogates, that is a route fraught with bloodshed for his destitute nation. For southern Africa, it could lead to military involvement in the East-West struggle. For South Africa, however, it would keep hostilities on foreign soil and away from the homeland. 

Mozambique's director of national security, Mr Jorge da Costa, has been granted political asylum in South Africa. The news was announced on June 12, 1982, with suitable fanfare. It is not often that South Africa finds itself chosen as a political sanctuary. Mr da Costa's defection is the fourth by a senior Mozambique official in the past month, and could be extremely damaging to the government of President Samora Machel. The other three defectors-two diplomats and a financial expert-seem to have settled for a quiet life in Europe. Mr da Costa takes with him detailed information about the activities of the guerrillas of the African National Congress who infiltrate South Africa from Mozambique. He will also be able to report on the growing sucess, inside the country he has abandoned, of the anti-government Mozambique Resistance Movement. Over the past two years, this has grown from a small rag-tag force to a well-armed group of 3,000-5,000 men. It is operating in an area of Mozambique larger than Britain, destroying railways, roads and power installations and attacking military garrisons. Its goal is the government's overthrow. It thrives on the failure to improve living standards in many parts of the country. But equally vital to its success has been South Africa's clandestine support. The insurgents were organized in 1976 with the help of the then Rhodesian government, which was fighting nationalist guerrillas based in Mozambique. When Rhodesia became Zimbabwe in 1980, South Africa became the mentor for Mozambique's rebels. South Africa denies this, but there is ample evidence that the resistance movement broadcasts from a radio station in the Transvaal, has training facilities in South Africa and has been supplied by aircraft from South Africa. You stop the African National Congress, South Africa is saying to Mr Machel, and we'll bring the Mozambique Resistance Movement to heel. A further inducement for South Africa to help the rebels is its desire to keep Zimbabwe an economic hostage. About 80% of Zimbabwe's foreign trade still passes through South Africa. Zimbabwean hopes to make greater use of Mozambique's ports for its trade have been thwarted by guerrilla attacks on roads and railways. The Mozambique Resistance Movement serves South Africa's immediate interests very well. But some South Africans are worried that in the longer run the leftist Machel government might be driven to seek further help from the Soviet Union or Cuba. Portugal, the former colonial power, has agreed to provide instructors to train some of Mozambique's troops in counter-insurgency. Two weeks ago President Machel cancelled a planned visit to Europe in order to take personal charge of the war against the guerrillas; he made his decision after guerrillas had ambushed a train and killed 40 people.

On December 8, 1982, Mozambique accused South Africa of mounting a raid across the border this week in which 16 Mozambicans were wounded. But South Africa rejected the claim as part of a "ludicrous" propaganda campaign. In a related development, South Africa's army took a group of reporters Wednesday to the border area on a tour intended to show that previous Mozambican charges of a concentration of South African troops on the frontier were inaccurate. Relations between black-ruled Mozambique and South Africa's white-minority government worsened two weeks ago when Mozambique asserted South Africa was massing troops on the border. South Africa denied the charges. Brig. Jan Klopper, South Africa's military operations director, speculated that Mozambique may be using the pretense of a South African military threat in order to invite Cuban troops into the country. Klopper said Cuban leader Fidel Castro, as head of the non-aligned movement, has circulated the accusation to members of the group. The official Mozambican news agency said South African forces crossed the border Monday and reached a cattle ranch at Mapulanguene, 5 miles inside Mozambique. It said that in addition to wounding 16 people, the South Africans destroyed three tractors before Mozambican border guards and militia forced them to withdraw.
The raid was "clearly part of the strategy of aggression of fascist circles in South Africa," the news agency said. A South African military spokesman denied the report, saying that "this latest round of propaganda is just as ludicrous as all other statements emanating from the Mozambican, Marxist-controlled propaganda machine." A total of 18 foreign and local reporters were taken on a one-day trip by airplane and bus along less than 37 miles of the 330-mile frontier. The reporters saw no South African soldiers except about 15 guarding the bush landing strip at Phalaborwa and others at the Seventh Infantry Battalion headquarters nearby. Deputy Commander Maj. Callie Sanders said the battalion conducts field exercises for up to 1,000 men at a time in a training block 37 miles from Mozambique. The reporters were not taken to two other South African military training sites near Mozambique, nor were they shown the border area in Kruger game park, which is patrolled by police and park guards. Mapulanguene, where the South Africans reportedly attacked Monday, is near the midpoint of the Kruger park border. Brig. Klopper said several military exercises took place near the frontier within the past month, but that they were routine and did not involve unusual numbers of men. "I've got to show you something that doesn't exist," Klopper said of the reported South African troop buildup. He said the Mozambican charge "could well be stage-setting for the presence of more foreign troops in the country ... We already have a Cuban presence in Angola." The reporters flew from Pretoria, the South African capital, to a military landing field near Komatipoort and 3 miles from the frontier. Military escorts said a number of military airstrips have been built close to South Africa's borders, and that this one was believed capable of handling jet fighters and transport aircraft. Klopper, who accompanied the reporters on the trip, denied Mozambican charges that South Africa is aiding Mozambique National Resistance guerrillas, who have been attacking transport and communications facilities in an apparent effort to destabilize Mozambican President Samora Machel's government. South Africa says Mozambique shelters members of the African National Congress, the main black nationalist guerrilla group seeking to overthrow the white-minority government.

South African troops attacked ANC targets in Namaacha, Mozambique on August 23, 1982, resulting in the deaths of two Mozambicans and one Portuguese civilian. 

South African military aircraft attacked ANC targets near Maputo, Mozambique on May 23, 1983, resulting in the deaths of 41 ANC members, 17 Mozambican soldiers, and six civilains. South African troops attacked ANC targets in Maputo on October 17, 1983. This was MID3070

MID2801 occurred when South Africa attacked ANC targets in Maputo, Mozambique with rockets, killing 3 people on May 29, 1987.

On December 29, 1987, South Africa accused Mozambique of seizing its helicopter and four crew members as they were searching for the wreckage of a crashed airliner (MID2800).

On April 27, 1988, President Joachim Chissano blamed South Africa for Mozambique's devastating civil war but sent an emissary on a goodwill mission to the white-ruled nation, raising the possibility of a summit meeting. Chissano spoke harshly of South Africa at the opening of a conference convened by his Marxist-oriented government and the United Nations to address Mozambique's emergency relief needs for the coming year. Mozambique says 6 million of its 14.5 million people need emergency food aid. It has appealed for 900 million tons of donated food, as well as other assistance, with a total cost of $380 million. Mozambique attributes most of its problems to the insurgency waged since 1977 by the Mozambique National Resistance, which it says is backed by South Africa in violation of a 1984 non-aggression treaty. But as the conference began, Chissano dispatched Cooperation Minister Jacinto Veloso with a conciliatory message for South African President P.W. Botha. South Africa's Foreign Ministry said Veloso met with Botha, conveyed Chissano's interest in improving relations and discussed a possible summit meeting between the two leaders. The Foriegn Ministry quoted Botha as offering to promote regional development and saying the two countries should stop accusing each other of breaching the 1984 non-aggression accord. In the treaty, Mozambique and South Africa pledged to halt assistance to insurgents fighting the other country's government. There is widespread international support for Mozambique's claim that South African security forces continue to provide logistical aid to the Mozambican rebels despite the treaty. The conference in Maputo was attended by about 200 delegates from U.N. agencies, relief organizations and foreign governments. A U.S. delegate, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Roy Stacey, accused the Mozambican rebels of "one of the most brutal holocausts against ordinary human beings since World War II." Stacey said the rebels' supporters, "wherever they may be, cannot wash the blood from their hands unless all support for this unconscionable violence is stopped immediately." Without specifying figures, he said the United States intended to make Mozambique its largest aid recipient in sub-Saharan Africa. U.N. Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar, in a message to the conference, said Mozambique "remains the target of externally supported acts of destabilization." "This continued reign of terror has increasingly involved random and brutal killings, pillaging of the population, wide-scale destruction and sabotage," he said. In his speech, Chissano said South Africa was engaged in a "criminal and irresponsible" strategy to weaken black-ruled southern African states. He said the rebel movement "has its command in South Africa, where it receives all kinds of aid." A Swedish official, Sten Rylander, urged the international community to provide security assistance, as well as emergency aid, in order to protect relief projects. Despite the strains between Mozambique and South Africa, there have been signs of increasing cooperation. The two governments have engaged in negotiations aimed at rehabilitating a major hydroelectric project in Mozambique that has been frequently targeted by rebel saboteurs. The chairman of South Africa's largest conglomerate held talks with Chissano and other Mozambican officials in Maputo on the possible involvement of Anglo American Corp. in developing Mozambique's natural resources. Anglo's chairman, Gavin Relly, said his company might be interested in forestry, agriculture and natural gas projects.

As the 1990s arrived, there were two major changes in the dynamics between these two states though. First, in 1989, the government of Mozambique decided to abandon its Marxist-Leninist philosophy. A new constitution was enacted in 1990. A peace agreement was signed with Renamo on October 4, 1992, but it took until December, 1993 to witness any demobilization of Renamo forces. General elections were held in Mozambique in 1994, and both sides accepted the results. Further Renamo was incorporated into the government structure in 1995.

In South Africa, the ANC as well as 59 other previously illegal organizations were legalized on February 2, 1990. Over the next several months, the South African government saw the institution of a new constitution and an end to apartheid. Nelson Mandela, who had been a prisoner for nearly 30 years for his leadership in opposition to the South African government, was freed and became president.

These domestic changes in both countries ended the fundamental basis for their rivalry.

SOURCES-CR: 
Barber and Barrett, 1990; Brecher and Wilkenfeld, 1997; Broderick, Burford, and Freer, 2001; Degenhardt, 1988; Dzimba, 1998; New York Times, May 30 1987, December 29, 1987.

PS-NARRATIVE: 

19750625-19810129 0.25

Mozambique became an independent state on June 25, 1975, after being part of the Portuguese empire. On February 28, 1979, the general manager of South African Railways, Dr Loubser, and the chief of Mozambique Railways, Mr Alcantara Santos have signed a new agreement on co-operation in Johannesburg, to replace the 1970 accord. This follows a decision that the 1970 accord should be adopted and adapted to meet present requirements. Dr Loubser said the main purpose of the new agreement is to coordinate the day-by-day arrangements for the flow of traffic between South Africa and Mozambique. It was a business agreement between the railways' administrations of the two countries and it is based on sound economic factors. The agreement stipulates that the two administrations should help each other if requested, in, for example, the provision of professional services, manpower and materials. It also provides for repairs to machinery and installations. The importance of the ports of Maputo and Matola, and higher charges for rolling stock and additional equipment for the basis of the rest of agreement. In his address after the ceremony, Dr Loubser reaffirmed that South African Railways was prepared to offer the hand of friendship to neighbouring states. He said that politics played no role in the successful management of railways' administration.

On February 21, 1980, the South African Government has rejected assurances by the Government of Mozambique that it is not harboring terrorists on its territory and has warned Mozambique to take steps to prevent subversive acts launched against South Africa. The warning was contained in a formal Note addressed by the South African Department of Foreign Affairs to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of Mozambique. A copy of the Note has been released in Cape Town. The note gave warning that South Africa reserved the right to take whatever steps it considered necessary, wherever and whenever, to protect South African life and property. Recent events had produced conclusive evidence that terrorists planning subversion in South Africa were being harbored in Mozambique and were conducting murderous operations and acts of sabotage against the Republic of South Africa from bases in Mozambique. This, the Note said, was in spite of assurances received from Mozambican authorities that ANC terrorists and other subversive organizations did not operate from their territory. The Note said that the South African Government held the Government of Mozambique fully responsible for the presence of these terrorists on South African soil and for their actions which were indisputably in breach of international law. These activities violated the territorial integrity of South Africa and amounted to acts of aggression, the Note said. In the circumstances it was the duty of the Mozambican Government to take effective steps to put an end to these hostile acts and to ensure that no haven was given in Mozambique to individuals or groups perpetrating these acts.

On January 30, 1981, South African troops attacked ANC targets near Maputo in Mozambique, resulting in the deaths of 30 ANC members and two South African soldiers. This event marks the start of the rivalry between South Africa and Mozambique.

19880526-19940426 Transition 

On December 27, 1987, the last MID of RIV1155, MID2800 ended. 

On May 26, 1988, South Africa and Mozambique have revived a non-aggression pact that lapsed three years ago, agreeing not to support guerrilla movements operating in each other's territory. The agreement reached between ranking diplomats and military officials of the two neighbors was the latest in a series of recent developments signaling an easing of hostilities. The two sides said in a statement that they would reactivate meetings of a joint security commission "at the earliest possible date." The commission was established under the 1984 Nkomati Accord, a non-aggression treaty in which each country pledged to halt support for guerrillas fighting against the other government. Although technically still in effect, the treaty has been ignored since 1985, when Mozambique found documents indicating South Africa was violating the agreement through continued aid to the Mozambican rebels. Since then, the main source of friction between the countries has been Mozambique's persistent charge that South Africa has continued covert assistance to the Mozambique National Resistance rebel movement. South Africa denies the charge. The war has devastated Mozambique's economy and is the main cause of a nationwide famine that has left nearly 6 million of the country's 14.5 million people in need of food aid. The statement said: "The two delegations affirmed the commitments of their respective governments not to support the commission of violence against the peoples of their respective countries." No date was announced for the security commission to meet, but both sides have appeared eager in recent weeks to improve relations. South Africa has offered logistical aid to help protect a Mozambican hydroelectric project from rebel saboteurs and the chairman of South Africa's largest conglomerate visited Maputo to discuss possible investment. In addition, officials of both countries say a summit meeting may be arranged between their presidents, South Africa's P.W. Botha and Mozambique's Joaquim Chissano. Mozambique's delegation at Wednesday's talks was headed by the army commander, Lt. Gen. Tobais Dai. South Africa's delegation was led by the director-general of the Foreign Affairs Department, Niel Van Heerden, and included the army chief, Lt. Gen. A.J. Liebenberg.

President P.W. Botha will make his first official visit to neighboring, Marxist-ruled Mozambique, the countries said on September 11, 1988. Botha's meeting with Mozambican President Joaquim Chissano will underscore the improving relations between the long-hostile countries, although Mozambique continues to charge that South Africa supports an 11-year-old guerrilla insurgency in Mozambique. Botha, during his 10 years as head of South Africa's white-controlled government, has paid an official visit to Swaziland and made a secret visit to South African troops fighting in Angola. But he has not made an official state visit to neighboring Botswana, Mozambique or Zimbabwe, three of the so-called front-line states that vehemently oppose South Africa's apartheid policies of racial segregation. Mozambique's national news agency AIM, quoting unidentified official sources in Maputo, said Botha and Chissano would meet in the town of Songo, in the far-northern province of Tete. The South African Department of Foreign Affairs confirmed Botha's visit, but did not release any details. The department also said Botha would travel Tuesday to Malawi, the only African nation that has full diplomatic relations with South Africa. The sources quoted by AIM said Botha and Chissano would discuss "matters of common interest" and would meet "in the spirit of the Nkomati Accord." The accord is a mutual non-aggression treaty signed in 1984 by Botha and Chissano's predecessor, Samora Machel, during a ceremony at the two countries' border. Machel was killed in a plane crash on South African territory in October 1986. Mozambique blamed South Africa for the crash, saying a false radio beacon lured the plane off course, but a South African-organized panel of international experts blamed the accident on errors by the Soviet crew. Chissano, chosen in November 1986 to succeed Machel, has increased Mozambique's contacts with the West, which now provides extensive aid to the war-and drought-wracked country. The Soviet bloc continues to supply weaponry and military training, but most Western governments support Chissano's government and have denounced the often brutal tactics of the rebels. Mozambique has repeatedly accused South Africa of violating the 1984 Nkomati Accord by assisting the Mozambique National Resistance guerrilla movement. South Africa, which aided the rebels before the accord, says it has halted the assistance. In the past year, South Africa has expanded its trade mission in Maputo, pursued economic development possibilities in Mozambique and revived a joint military monitoring commission established in the Nkomati Accord. The two countries also have signed an agreement aimed at rehabilitating a giant hydroelectric project near Songo so it can purchase electricity from Mozambique. The Mozambique National Resistance rebels repeatedly have sabotaged the Cahora Bassa hydroelectric project. Even when their relations were badly strained, Mozambique and South Africa maintained extensive ties. Tens of thousands of Mozambicans work as miners and migrant laborers in South Africa, and Maputo's electricity is supplied by South Africa. Botha's trip comes four days before the arrival in Mozambique of Pope John Paul II, who will be making a three-day tour at the close of a regional trip.

A South African warship docked in the Indian Ocean port of Beira on November 26, 1988, marking the first such visit since Mozambique gained independence from Portugal in 1975. The Drakensberg, a South African-built fleet replenishment vessel, called at the palm-fringed but decaying port to offload non-lethal military supplies for Mozambique's armed forces, fulfilling a South AFrican pledge made in September. South Africa's deputy ministers of defense, foreign affairs and technology flew to Beira to hand over the cargo. South Africa, an ideological foe of Marixst-ruled Mozambique, provided the supplies for Mozambican forces guarding a 1,000-mile line carrying electricity from a hydro-electric plant to the white-ruled southern state. Cahora Bassa dam and power station in northwestern Mozambique were built and financed jointly by Portugal and South Africa before a revolution in Portugal led to the east coast colony's independence in 1975. The long and vulnerable electric power lines have been the target of frequent sabotage by anti-Marxist rebels of the Mozambique National Resistance (MNR), denying Mozambique potential revenue from the sale of electricity to South Africa. Mozambique frequently accused Pretoria of arming and supporting the MNR, a charge South Africa denied. At a meeting near Cahora Bassa Sept. 12, South African President Pieter Botha promised President Joaquim Chissano non-lethal military supplies for Mozambican forces guarding the line. The visit Monday by the Drakensberg, the South African Navy's newest vessel, was the first such call by a warship from the southern neighbor since independence. A study commissioned by the U.S. State Department earlier this year accused the rebel movement of killing about 100,000 Mozambicans since 1984.

On November 30, 1988, South Africa is underscoring its commitment to warmer relations with Mozambique by donating military equipment to help protect a major hydroelectric project from the rebels that Pretoria once supported. A South African Navy supply ship that sailed north from Durban under the protection of a missile-equipped patrol boat began unloading 139 tons of nonlethal material, including 21 vehicles, at this port near the Indian Ocean. Another South African naval shipment, with 13 additional trucks, is scheduled to dock here on Monday. The equipment, which does not include any arms or ammunition, is earmarked for a Mozambican security force that would protect the Cahora Bassa dam and its power lines from attacks by the Mozambique National Resistance, the anti-Government guerrilla group known by the acronym Renamo. South Africa previously helped train and equip Renamo guerrillas. More than four years ago, it reported that its covert aid to the insurgents had stopped.

On May 3, 1989, the interaction between South Africa and Mozambique is growing steadily. The previous week the Director of Tourism in Mozambique, Mr Zacarias Sumbana, was a guest at an international tourism exhibition in South Africa. He was impressed by the exhibition, and said that it was very probably that Mozambique would take part in future trade and other fairs in South Africa. Mr Sumbana also said that tourism in southern Africa was very important because it could help create stability and promote understanding and good relations in the subcontinent. Since the revival of the Nkomati Accord last year, both South Africa and Mozambique have been doing everything possible to promote co-operation. South African businessmen have moved into Mozambique to reopen a brewery and a match factory, and to investigate large forestry projects. Mozambique has sent delegations to South Africa to study labor training projects. South Africa has renewed her labor agreement with Mozambique and is recruiting more migrant Mozambican workers. Millions of rands have been spent on the upgrading of the port of Maputo, so that greater use can be made of its facilities by South African exporters, thus earning much needed foreign exchange for Mozambique. Another important development is in the area of tourism. After independence, Mozambique's flourishing tourist trade died abruptly because of the political instability. As a result, Mozambique lost foreign exchange and international goodwill. Now Pretoria and Maputo are co-operating to promote tourism to Mozambique. Tourism to secure islands along the Mozambican coast such as Inhaca and Bazaruto has started off again, and tourist trips to other coastal resorts such as Inhambane are being considered. The co-operation between South Africa and Mozambique is an outstanding example of how political differences can be overcome in the interests of development and progress for southern Africa.

Mozambique President Joaquim Chissano will meet the president of the ruling South African National Party, F.W. de Klerk, on July 18, 1989, amid increasing talk of peace here. De Klerk will be accompanied by Foreign Minister R.F. "Pik" Botha and other high officials in what analysts say will be a discussion of mutual "intentions." Chissano said here today that his government is ready to begin talks with the Mozambique National Resistance (MNR) rebels and peacefully settle the ongoing conflicts, "now that the foreign factors in the violence have been reduced." He asserted that after many talks with leading members of the international community, to whom he had explained the character of the Mozambique war, "we have been able to obtain understanding of our viewpoints, including in South Africa. "We managed to get our message through to various sectors of the South African population, including the political and economic sectors," the president declared. In South Africa, Botha said the meeting will be a continuation "of the Songo conference"-a reference to the Sept. 1988 conference in Songo, northern Mozambique, between Chissano and South African President Pieter W. Botha. At that conference the two countries agreed to reactivate the "Security and Good Neighbor" pact concluded at Nkomati in March 1984. According to Professor Robert Davis, of the African Studies Center of Maputo's Eduardo Mondlane University, tomorrow's meeting is crucial. De Klerk, the probable successor to Botha-who will leave the post of president after the September elections this year-may provide a glimpse of the apartheid policy changes he is believed to have in mind. The presence at tomorrow's meeting of Foreign Minister Botha, who is also a member of South Africa's influential Security Council, adds extra weight to the deliberations with Chissano. South Africa provides the main support for the MNR which for the past ten years has been conducting a campaign against Chissano's ruling Mozambique National Liberation Front (Frelimo). MNR, which is accused of killing more than 100,000 civilians, was created with the help of the intelligence services of Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe) to counter the aid which Mozambique was then giving to the guerrillas fighting the then government of Premier Ian Smith. According to the 1984 security pact, Mozambique agreed to stop aiding the anti-apartheid African National Congress (ANC) and South Africa agreed to stop helping MNR. Many sources agree that Pretoria has not fulfilled its promise. At the 1988 Songo summit the two countries agreed to create two joint commissions-one to deal with economic questions and the other with the exploitation of the Cabora Bassa hydro-electric complex at Tete, on the Zambesi River, in northern Mozambique. Relations between the two countries have actually improved of late, with fewer mutual accusations of violations of the security treaty. Bilateral trade and economic links have increased. Mario Dimande, director-general of Mozambique Railways (CFM), told IPS in Maputo, "There has been a significant change since the Songo summit. Use of the Komatipoort-to-Maputo railway line has increased 50 percent, even though the freight carried is mostly coal and citric fruit." Komatipoort is a railhead on the South African side of the border. Traditionally, much of the imports which reach South Africa's principal industrial zone around Johannesburg come by way of the port of Maputo, and along the road and rail connection to the heart of South Africa's Transvaal Province. By the same token, a big slice of Transvaal's exports are shipped by way of Maputo, after reaching the Mozambique capital along the same communications system. Last year South Africa shipped one million tons of export freight by way of Maputo. A further improvement in relations came in November 1988, when Pretoria eased restrictions on Mozambique labor seeking jobs in the country. The restrictions had been imposed in 1975 and had reduced the inflow of Mozambique labor from 118,000 to 60,000 a year. Already the number of Mozambique workers employed in South African mines has jumped to roughly 90,000. According to many observers, the most important element of the tripartite agreements, which include Portugal, revolves around the Cabora Bassa hydro-electric complex-one of the biggest of its kind in Africa. South Africa put up the majority of the money for the construction of the giant dam across the Zambesi River, and it will be the main beneficiary of the electricity supplies which it will produce. But in 1984 MNR guerrillas destroyed the project's power transmission system. South Africa agreed to pay half of the $26 million needed to carry out repairs and provide security for the installations.

Black South African nationalist Nelson Mandela promised Mozambicans on July 16, 1990, that he would do what he could to ensure that no one in South Africa undermines Mozambique's fledgling efforts to end a bloody 15-year civil war. South Africa, which borders Mozambique to the south, previously backed right-wing rebels against Mozambique's Marxist government, and Mozambique alleges individuals in South Africa continue to aid the guerrillas. Mandela, on the last leg of a 14-nation, 45-day tour of three continents, said his African National Congress had a duty ''to ensure that no one in our country does anything to subvert the peace process in which you are engaged.'' ''I will do all I can to help,'' Mandela told thousands of Mozambicans who rallied in Maputo's Independence Square, declared a public holiday in his honor. The 71-year-old ANC deputy president and de facto leader said the movement would try to guarantee that ''instruments of death'' were not sent from South Africa into Mozambique ''to nourish those who thrive on the precious blood of this country.'' The Marxist Frelimo government and officials of the Mozambique National Resistance, known as Renamo, held their first direct peace talks on July 8-10, 1990, in a bid to end the war which flared shortly after the country won independence from Portugal in 1975. Renamo was openly backed by South Africa, which borders Mozambique to the south, until a non-aggression pact aimed at stabilizing the region was signed by Pretoria and Maputo in 1984. However, Mozambican President Joaquim Chissano now alleges Renamo receives aid from ethnic Portuguese colonists living in South Africa. ''Peace in Mozambique is a matter of deep concern to our movement and our people,'' Mandela said. Referring to the conflict which has claimed up to 500,000 lives, ''Women and children have perished ... the killing and destruction must come to an end. ''We must move quickly to end all the conflicts in our region and reach just and lasting solutions so that we can declare war on hunger and poverty,'' he said. Mandela, who arrived in Mozambique from Kenya will visit the port city of Beira before returning home. He has met leaders in nations of Europe, North America, and Africa during his tour, designed to carry the message that only further trade sanctions will press the white-minority Pretoria government to irrevocable racial reforms.

On June 11, 1992, as South Africa revised its outlook on relations with the southern African region, Mozambique hoped to reap in the profit. After a decade of active hostility and military aggression against its black majority-ruled, neighboring states, South Africa's white minority government flaunts a new regional policy of diplomacy and economic cooperation. Mozambique's economy now lies wasted after 16 years of war waged by rebels of the Mozambique National Resistance (RENAMO), historically backed by South Africa. The Mozambique government says changes inside South Africa will help bring peace and investment back to the former Portuguese colony. South Africa's shift to diplomacy is partly explained by the high economic costs of aggression the state can no longer afford, says Anthoni Van Nieuwkerk, researcher at the South African Institute of International Affairs. In the post Cold War era of new world trading blocks there is also growing recognition in South Africa's seat of power, Pretoria, that national economic expansion depends on links with the region. "We must develop regionally," says South African President F.W. de Klerk, who pictures his country as the powerful center of a regional economic and trading block. But most of South Africa's potential partners in the region are stone-broke. Mozambique's national infrastructure-such as roads, railways and energy lines-lie destroyed, deliberately sabotaged by RENAMO rebels. The war has cost the country some $15 billion, says the ministry of finance, making Mozambique one of the world's poorest countries. "Destabilization worked," says Van Nieuwkerk. Mozambique dropped its Marxist constitution in 1990 and is out fishing for foreign investment. Mozambique's Foreign Minister Pascoal Mocumbi says: "as neighbors, South African investors should be better than Western business partners for Mozambique. They know the environment better, their markets are closer, we have natural geographical ties." With the transition away from apartheid in South Africa, Mocumbi hopes more investment will be on its way to Mozambique. Some technical projects are already back on track. South Africa's electric company, Eskom, plans to rebuild the 900-km-long electric line from Cahora Bassa dam in northern Mozambique, to Apollo in South Africa, restoring the 1,500 pylons destroyed by RENAMO. Gas from Mozambique is to be exported by South African state company, Sasol. The South African Chamber of Mines is studying mineral resources in Mozambique. South Africa is already involved in rehabilitating Maputo Port, the nearest export route for South African producers in the northern Transvaal. But, according to one academic source with close links with the present regime, "state cooperation ends there. South Africa faces economic crisis of its own, and any post-Apartheid government will have to meet the high expectations of its own, deprived black majority." "You can write development aid from South Africa to the region on your stomach, and wipe it off again with a wet cloth-there won't be any." Van Nieuwkerk says even in the post-apartheid era, any capital from South Africa to Mozambique will probably go through the "Development Bank of South Africa," which hopes to be a channel for the International Monetary Fund credit to the region. Beyond that, Mozambique will have to rely on private capital investment. According to Mocumbi, the country is increasingly becoming attractive to private capital. After the British, South Africans are currently the second biggest foreign investors in Mozambique. A main investment pull to Mozambique is tourism, and South African companies already manage the major hotels in the capital, Maputo. But insecurity, both in Mozambique and, now with the increasing "township violence" in South Africa too, is still a major stumbling block to private foreign investment. The government is negotiating a political settlement of the conflict with the RENAMO at peace talks in Rome. If they manage to settle, Mozambique could be a more attractive proposition to foreign business than strife-ridden South Africa.

19940427-20159999 0.5

The end of apartheid in South African, the election of Nelson Mandela, and the end of the Mozambique civil war (a peace agreement was signed with RENAMO on October 4, 1992) signal the end of the rivalry between the two countries. In South Africa, the ANC as well as 59 other previously illegal organizations were legalized on February 2, 1990. Over the next several months, the South African government saw the institution of a new constitution and an end to apartheid. Nelson Mandela, who had been a prisoner for nearly 30 years for his leadership in opposition to the South African government, was freed and became president on the first post-apartheid elections on April 27, 1994. 

South Africa and neighboring Mozambique announced plans on February 28, 1995, to cooperate more closely in combating crime such as smuggling and poaching along the common border. Visiting Mozambican President Joaquim Chissano and his South African counterpart Nelson Mandela signed in Cape Town a cooperation agreement on fighting crime. The agreement enables security forces from each side to take part in cross-border operations. The 500-kilometre South African-Mozambican border has become notorious for the smuggling of weapons, cars, drugs, ivory and rhino horn. The document also invites other countries in the region to join and could become a significant security arrangement in southern Africa, according to observers. A second agreement was related to promoting tourism between South Africa and Mozambique. Mandela, in awarding Chissano the country's highest medal of honor for foreign citizens, said: "Through his statesmanship, peace and democracy led to a new era in the Republic of Mozambique and the southern African region". Chissano arrived in Cape Town earlier Tuesday at the start of a four-day official visit. Mandela and Deputy President Frederik de Klerk greeted Chissano with bear hugs on his arrival at Cape Town's airport. A naval band played the national anthems and a 21-gun salute was given. Chissano, who is accompanied by three ministers, addresses parliament in Cape Town before leaving for Johannesburg.

On May 7, 1996, in addition to the Maputo Corridor Investor Conference, Maputo also saw the signing of the accord giving the go-ahead for South African farmers to come to Mozambique. The ceremony was attended by President Joaquim Chissano and his South African counterpart. As far as is known, the South African project is worth more than 800m dollars. This money will be used only to finance the start of the program, including the construction of infrastructure such as homes, schools and hospitals, as well as providing seeds, livestock and other equipment needed to begin operating. Speaking at the signing on ceremony in the Maputo mayor's office this morning, President Joaquim Chissano said joint initiatives had paved the way for joint cooperation which, he said, was intended to bring development to people in both countries. The Mozambican head of state noted that the undertakings of 1994-when the Joint Mozambique-South Africa Cooperation Commission was created-were not forgotten as this agreement clearly showed. President Chissano noted that the South African farmers would face some difficulties along the way, including natural disasters. He added, however, that this was no reason to give up and everybody was optimistic about results. He said the Mozambican government was willing to help guarantee the project's success. In his turn, South African President Nelson Mandela said the Joint Mozambique-South Africa Cooperation Commission had been working in various areas, including defense, security, education and agriculture, but cooperation was likely to increase even further with these agreements.

South Africa is deporting up to 1,600 illegal immigrants a week to Mozambique in spite of a Mozambican government request to limit forced repatriations, the Home Affairs Department said on May 28, 1996. "We have a train running to Mozambique every week, returning an average of 500 illegal immigrants at a time," a departmental spokesman told the SAPA news agency. "Depending on the numbers which have to be repatriated, the train sometimes carries between 1,000 and 1,600 Mozambicans." The spokesman, however, denied reports that South Africa had "dumped" 1,000 deportees in Mozambique last week, saying an orderly process was followed when returning aliens to their home countries. "We don't return an individual without first confirming his country of origin, and Mozambique is well aware of these repatriations," the unnamed spokesman said. Radio Mozambique on Monday said a South African train had dumped 1,000 Mozambicans in their home country's border town of Ressano Garcia after they had been rounded up for being in South Africa illegally. Forced repatriation of Mozambicans has for some months been the focus of bilateral discussions between South Africa and Mozambique. Earlier this year Mozambican President Joaquim Chissano asked President Nelson Mandela to order the suspension of repatriations. The issue was also raised in the Mozambican capital Maputo earlier this month at the first meeting of the permanent joint commission for cooperation between South Africa and Mozambique. During this meeting, Mozambique called on South Africa to limit the deportation of its citizens to 100 at a time. It also asked South Africa to give at least three days' notice of repatriation dates and numbers. Asked about this request, the Home Affairs spokesman said the matter will be discussed at the next bilateral meeting between the two countries. Mandela last week, during a state visit to Germany, said South Africa could not be very tough with illegal immigrants from neighboring countries. "In a way those countries have been our home for decades," he said. "We regard those illegal immigrants as our brothers and sisters."

On December 7, 1998, it was reported that Mozambique continues to import over a quarter of its products from neighboring South Africa. Mozambique imports 36,7% of its needs from South Africa, or US$ 227,8 million of the S 757 million imported into the country between January and September this year. South Africa is the second supplier to Mozambique following Portugal. The United States of America ranks third.

International relief aid for flood-stricken Mozambique continued to poor in on March 6, 2000, with a number of countries using South Africa as a base to launch their operations. The essential road link between Maputo and South Africa, initially disrupted, has also been reopened. However, the South African Weather Bureau has warned that Mozambique is likely to receive more heavy rainfall on Tuesday, which would hamper the massive international relief operation which is currently under way. Forecasters are predicting heavy rains, in excess of 50 milimetres for southern Mozambique and north-eastern South Africa. The rains are expected to develop on Monday night and early Tuesday and move over north-eastern KwaZulu-Natal, Swaziland, the southern Lowveld and the southern extremity of Mozambique. Light showers were expected over central and northern Mozambique. However, Cyclone Gloria, which was downgraded to a tropical depression, weakened overnight and was further downgraded to a weak tropical disturbance. Although it could re-intensify over the Mozambican Channel, it was not expected to impact on the weather in Mozambique and South Africa. In South Africa, the official flood-related death toll in the Northern Province reached 109 on Monday and it is estimated that approximately 8,000 families have had their homes destroyed or damaged by the floods. About 130 drainage structures, including bridges, low-level crossings and culverts, have been damaged or washed away. The governments of Botswana, Mozambique, Zimbabwe and South Africa which have been worst affected by the torrential rains, have agreed to follow a more coordinated approach to relief efforts. "We have committed ourselves to promoting co-ordination in the handling of the current, and all future disasters and to establish appropriate structures in order to realize this objective," said Provincial and Local Government Minister Sydney Mufamadi. The number of Mozambicans awaiting rescue by helicopter is estimated to be at more than 20,000. South Africans have opened their hearts to the thousands of refugees, contributing millions of dollars and providing blankets, medicine and food. And South African helicopter pilots who have been flying rescue missions around the clock over the past two weeks have been widely praised for their efforts. Archbishop Desmond Tutu also commended President Thabo Mbeki and the South African Air Force for their swift response to the flood disaster. "Our President has done us proud by his statement that we should go in and rescue people first, and talk about the money to pay for it afterwards. "We should also salute the helicopter crews who are doing an outstanding job. We give thanks to God for all those who are carrying out this tremendous rescue," he said. In an interview on South African television, Mozambican President Joachim Chissano also thanked South Africa and other neighboring countries such as Malawi who offered their assistance despite also being affected by the torrential rains. However, he criticized overseas countries for their slow response in dealing with the catastrophe.

On May 10, 2002 in Maputo, Mozambique and South Africa signed two bilateral accords in the air transport, and search and rescue sectors. The accords, which take immediate effect, will ease the flow of passengers and goods between the two countries. Tomaz Salomao, Mozambique's minister of transport and communications, says the accords will be advantageous to Mozambique in that they will lead to the opening of new ports of entry. Salomao At present South Africa has two points of entry into Mozambique: Maputo and Beira. As of now, other points of entry will be available to the South Africans, namely Vilanculos, Nampula, and Pemba. In addition to Johannesburg, Mozambican airliners will as of now be able to enter South Africa via Durban, Cape Town, Lanseria, and Nelspruit. Commenting on the search and rescue accord, Minister Salomao said that it would permit swift action in case of accidents along the Mozambican coast.

Presidents Joaquim Chissano of Mozambique and Thabo Mbeki of South Africa will meet in Pretoria on June 24, 2003, to prepare for the African Union summit, which is scheduled to take place in Maputo in July 2003. Speaking before departure from Maputo, Chissano said he needed to exchange views about the chairmanship of the African Union, adding that that was the main purpose of his visit to South Africa. Chissano, while in South Africa for the African Economic Summit, could not meet President Mbeki because he was out of the country. He said that `We needed to exchange views on South Africa's chairmanship of the African Union and the planning of the Maputo summit. So, as host of the forthcoming summit, I will meet the current chairman of the African Union. That is the main purpose of my visit to Pretoria. To facilitate my role as host of the July summit, I need to familiarize myself with the main issues that might come up for discussion.'

On August 27, 2003, the Presidents Thabo Mbeki of South Africa and Joaquim Chissano of Mozambique signed a memorandum of understanding to facilitate the construction of a 1.3 billion dollar hydro-electricity dam in Mozambique. According to a joint communique after economic and trade talks between the two leaders in Mozambique's northern coastal city of Pemba, "the memorandum aims to provide an investment-friendly environment in the energy sector on the Zambezi Valley." The main energy project on the Zambezi valley is the construction of a 2,500MW hydroelectric dam, just south of the existing Cahora Bassa dam. The 1.3 billion dollar Mepanda Uncua dam project would meet power needs in Mozambique and in neighboring states and end the monopoly enjoyed for years by South Africa's ESKOM. The latest energy pact is one of the more than 20 agreements that the two neighboring states have signed since 1994, including protocols and memoranda of understanding. Cahora Bassa was built by Portugal the former colonial power in Mozambique. Most of the electricity produced there was contracted out to ESKOM. Mozambique's electricity supply firm EDM currently supplies southern Mozambique with power bought from ESKOM. Chissano and Mbeki's meeting was part of regular consultation talks aimed at boosting the two countries' social and economic development. South Africa is Mozambique's main trading partner and leading investor followed by Britain and Portugal. At least 57 percent of Mozambique's imports emanate from South Africa, representing about 18 percent of all South Africa's export volumes to Africa. About 26 percent of Mozambique's exports are destined for South Africa. South African firms are ahead of key development and job creation projects in Mozambique. They lead in such major and multi-million dollar projects as in aluminum smelting, construction of a pipeline to transport natural gas from southern Mozambique to South Africa, the Ressano Garcia railway linking the two countries and airport operations.

South Africa signed an agreement on April 15, 2005, to waive visa requirements for visitors from Mozambique as part of a wider program aimed at strengthening links between the two neighbors. The long-awaited agreement-signed at a ceremony attended by President Thabo Mbeki and his Mozambican counterpart, Armando Guebuza, in the South African capital Pretoria-is meant to ease lengthy waits at busy border crossings and boost trade. It will enter into force on April 15, 2005, and applies to people staying for less than 30 days. It is expected to end the mass arrests and deportations by South African authorities of about 1,000 illegal immigrants from its northern neighbor every week. Mozambicans hailed the deal. "I am very happy because most people who live in southern Mozambique, like myself, have relatives working in the gold mines and in other services", said Silva Marcos Mahumana, who works for Radio Mozambique monitoring services. Silva Marcos Mahumana said he would now be able to visit his daughter, who works in a supermarket in South Africa. He could not afford this previously as the cost of the visa was nearly half his monthly salary. "I will just pack my things and go to "Djoni" (Johannesburg) to purchase things and sell here in Mozambique", said Joana Joaquim, a 36-year-old businesswoman who sells clothes, shoes, handbags and mobile phones. The Maputo Corridor Logistics Initiative, set up last year to improve road and rail links and promote Mozambique's capital as a port outlet for goods from northern South Africa, said it was "great news." "It will reduce the cost of doing business in the region and encourage economic growth for both South Africa and Mozambique," it said in a statement. "Tourist and other organized business bodies are delighted that this is now resolved for the good of the economy of both our countries," it said. Mbeki and Guebuza also pledged to increase cooperation in industry and trade programs. South Africa is the biggest foreign investor in Mozambique, investing some 8 billion rand (USD1.3 billion, [euro]997 million) in 247 projects, ranging from the mining and minerals sectors to agriculture, tourism and transport. South African exports to Mozambique last year totaled 5 billion rand (US$797 million, [euro]623 million) and imports were worth 200 million rand (US$32 million, [euro]25 million). South Africa is Mozambique's main trading partner after Portugal, the former colonial power. John Mgagura, a 56 year-old shoe shop owner who has been buying his wares from South Africa for more than 20 years, said business would now be cheaper and easier for him. "The decision to abolish visas for Mozambicans is a good idea, not only for me, but also for many people in our country," he said.

On August 2, 2005, Mozambique and South Africa have officially launched their chamber of commerce, a testimony to the level of interest that exists in greater South African-Mozambique business connections. The South Africa-Mozambique Chamber of Commerce (SAMOZACC) was launched at a gala event July 27, 2005, addressed by an impressive list of speakers, headed up by Mozambican Industry and Trade Deputy Minister Alfredo Namitete. Other speakers included Mathews Phosa, the SAMOZACC designated chairperson, a well-known former Premier of Mpumalanga Province, in South Africa, and now an influential businessman, and Antonio Matos, the chairperson of the Chamber of Commerce and Industry Mozambique/South Africa in Maputo (CCIMOSA). The newly-established SAMOZACC will now start a membership drive. A Management Committee for the new Chamber has already been nominated, and will formally be elected at the first meeting of SAMOZACC, to be held soon.

South Africa has become Mozambique's leading investment partner. Economic adviser to Mozambique's ministry of industry and commerce, Sergio Carlos Macamo, told delegates at the PriceWaterhouseCoopers South Africa/Mozambique investment seminar in Nelspruit on March 15, 2006, that Mozambique was exporting 50 percent of its products to South Africa. Likewise, Mozambique was also importing 50 percent of its products from its neighbor. "We're exporting and importing more from South Africa," Mr Macamo said. The partnership between the two countries stem from the R25 billion Maputo Development Corridor that was initiated in 1996 and has already resulted in the massive upgrading of transport infrastructure between the two countries. The N4 toll road links Gauteng to Maputo harbor, which is closer to Gauteng than the Durban port. Mr Macamo said Mozambique was offering attractive investment packages and had preferential access to European and US markets. "We have also made it easy for private businesses to invest in our country through simplifying industrial and commercial licensing," he added. Mozambican companies, he said, were looking for partners in glass, textile and rubber ventures. Mr Macamo said there were also vast opportunities for South African investors in mega projects such as coal mining, bio-diesel manufacturing, aluminum and the refurbishment of railway lines. Chief executive officer of the South Africa/Mozambique chamber of commerce, David Robbetze, said the risk of investing in Mozambique was small. Mr Robbetze said Mozambique was politically stable, had a positive relationship with South Africa and was a "sweetheart" internationally. Mr Robbetze acknowledged that land ownership and transport were limited, and skilled labor was short. According to the head of the linkages division of Mozambique's Investment Promotion Centre, Antonio Macamo, the country's economy had been growing at 8.2 percent since 1998. "Our infrastructure is under massive improvement, and there is ample availability of natural resources such as coal, land and natural gas," Mr Macamo said.

PS-SOURCES: Africa News December 7, 1998; March 6, 2000; August 21, 2003; August 2, 2005; March 15, 2006; BBC February 28, 1979; February 21, 1980; June 30, 1980; February 9, 1981; May 3, 1989; May 7, 1996; May 11, 2002; June 24, 2003; August 28, 2003; Agence France Presse May 28, 1996; August 27, 2003; Associated Press January 30, 1981; December 8, 1982; April 27, 1988; May 26, 1988; September 11, 1988; April 15, 2005; New York Times November 1, 1982; September 13, 1988; November 30, 1988; The Economist June 12, 1982; The Globe and Mail December 11, 1981; Washington Post April 6, 1983; IPS July 18, 1989; June 11, 1992; United Press November 28, 1988; July 16, 1990; Xinhua November 15, 1988; Deutsche Presse-Agentur February 28, 1995 

MARITIME-MIDS:

MARITIME-DISPUTE:

Discussion:

SOURCES: Gibler, D.M. 2018. Militarized Interstate Dispute Narratives, 1816-2010. Langham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. 

NYT 12/29/1987
