FILE: cm552571v11.0.txt
DYAD: ZIMBABWE-BOTSWANA
RIVALRY: RIV1162
DISPUTE(S): MID1335 MID3268 MID1334 MID1333 MID3124 MID3015 MID3004 

RIVNOTES: 

PS: 19651111-19800411 0.00 19800412-19850826 0.25 19850827-20209999 0.5

PS-UPDATE2020:

PSNOTES: 

PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20220320
PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20220320

Territorial-Maritime-Boundary Issues Variables

MID1335 

TERRMID: MID1335 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID1335 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID1335 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID1335 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID1335 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID1335 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID1335 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID1335 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID1335 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID1335 3 -- uncertain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID1335 from cm narrative, the rivalry between Rhodesia and Botswana was centered on Botswana's support of rebel groups fighting against the Rhodesian regime. From Gibler, Miller, and Little 2016, Botswana placed a trade embargo on Rhodesia (but not a full embargo). The reason for this is unclear. News stories and cm narrative are also unclear on this. Coded not civil war because there is no indication that this incident was connected to militarized rebel activity, and coded uncertain because GML argue this is not a MID since a trade embargo does not constitute a MID. 

CIVWARLINK: MID1335 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID1335 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID1335 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID1335 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID1335 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID1335 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID3268 

TERRMID: MID3268 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID3268 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID3268 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID3268 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID3268 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID3268 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID3268 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID3268 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID3268 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID3268 3 -- uncertain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID3268 from Gibler, Miller, and Little 2016, South African and Zambian forces exchanged fire and damaged a Botswanan police station. The fighting was connected to the civil conflict in Rhodesia and Zambia's support for rebel groups opposing the South African and Rhodesian governments. (Separate rebel groups were fighting against Rhodesia and South Africa; Botswana's support for the anti-South African regime rebels does not connect to this MID, since those rebels are not involved in this mid.) Coded civil war MID because this was connected to civil conflict in Rhodesia, within this dyad, but coded uncertain because GML argue that this bilateral MID be dropped, since Botswana was not the target. 

CIVWARLINK: MID3268 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID3268 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID3268 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID3268 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID3268 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID3268 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID1333 

TERRMID: MID1333 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID1333 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID1333 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID1333 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID1333 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID1333 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID1333 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID1333 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID1333 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID1333 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID1333 from Gibler 2018, in 1976 Botswana protested when Rhodesian forces entered their territory to attack militarized rebels. A border clash between Botswana and Rhodesia followed, and additional incursions into Botswana by Rhodesian forces occurred. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to militarized rebels in Botswana who were targeting Rhodesia. 

CIVWARLINK: MID1333 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID1333 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID1333 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID1333 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID1333 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID1333 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID3124 

TERRMID: MID3124 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID3124 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID3124 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID3124 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID3124 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID3124 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID3124 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID3124 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID3124 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID3124 3 -- uncertain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID3124 from Gibler, Miller, and Little 2016, MID3124 is a continuation of MID1333. Rhodesia accused Botswana of supporting rebels fighting against Rhodesia, and Rhodesia attacked several alleged rebel bases in Botswana. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to militarized rebel activity in Botswana, but coded uncertain because GML recommend this case be merged with MID1333. 

CIVWARLINK: MID3124 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID3124 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID3124 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID3124 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID3124 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID3124 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID3015 

TERRMID: MID3015 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID3015 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID3015 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID3015 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID3015 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID3015 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID3015 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID3015 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID3015 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID3015 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID3015 from Gibler 2018, Rhodesian troops crossed into Botswana to attack rebels who were targeting the Rhodesian government. A border clash and a border closing followed. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to militarized rebels in Botswana. 

CIVWARLINK: MID3015 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID3015 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID3015 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID3015 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID3015 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID3015 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID3004 

TERRMID: MID3004 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID3004 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID3004 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID3004 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID3004 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID3004 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID3004 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID3004 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID3004 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID3004 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID3004 from Gibler 2018, in 1978 Rhodesian troops again crossed into Botswana to pursue militarized rebels there who were targeting the Rhodesian government. Rhodesia also demolished a ferry and raided the Botswanan capital. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to militarized rebel activity in Botswana. 

CIVWARLINK: MID3004 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID3004 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID3004 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID3004 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID3004 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID3004 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID1334

TERRMID: MID1334 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID1334 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID1334 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID1334 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID1334 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID1334 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID1334 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID1334 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID1334 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID1334 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID1334 from Keesings Archive, in 1975 Botswana protested that Rhodesia had violated their sovereignty on numerous occasions. Rhodesia was attacking rebels and running counter-insurgency campaigns for an extended period of time, and in pursuit of rebels, they fired on a Botswana village (across the border) and, on a separate occasion, sent missionaries into Botswana to act as spies. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to civil conflict activity in both Rhodesia and Botswana, within this dyad. 

CIVWARLINK: MID1334 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID1334 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID1334 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID1334 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID1334 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID1334 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

NARRATIVE-CM:
Botswana opposed Rhodesia's unilateral declaration of independence from Britain on November 11, 1965. Botswanan police and Rhodesian troops clashed near the border on December 17-19, 1976. Botswana referred the matter to the United Nations (UN) Security Council on December 21, 1976. The Soviet Union offered economic assistance to Botswana. Botswanan troops and Rhodesian troops clashed near the border on January 11-21, 1977. The UN Security Council appealed for an "immediate and total cessation" of military hostilities by Rhodesia against Botswana on January 14, 1977. The UN secretary-general sent a fact-finding mission to Botswana. The UN fact-finding mission issued a report on March 31, 1977. Rhodesian troops entered Botswana in February, 1978 and massacred several civilians. Botswanan troops and Rhodesian troops clashed near Lesoma in the Kazungula region on February 27, 1978, resulting in the deaths of 15 Botswanan soldiers and two civilians. Botswanan troops and Rhodesian troops clashed near the border on January 8, 1979. Rhodesian troops entered Botswana on April 13, 1979. Botswanan troops and Rhodesian troops clashed near the border beginning on August 8, 1979. 

SOURCES-CM: 
Sources: Africa Research Bulletin (ARB), January 1-31, 1977, February 1-28, 1977, March 1-31, 1978, November 1-30, 1983, December 1-31, 1983; Brecher and Wilkenfeld, 1997, 109-110, 115-117, 467-468; Jessup, 1998, 86; Foreign Broadcast Information Service (FBIS), March 1, 1978; Tillema, 1991, 127-128.

NARRATIVE-CR:
Botswana opposed Rhodesia's unilateral declaration of independence from Britain on November 11, 1965. This, like the rivalry between Rhodesia and Zambia created tension throughout the remainder of the period between 1965 and Britain's formal granting of Rhodesian independence in 1980. Guerilla rebel groups that opposed the white minority regime in Rhodesia based themselves in neighboring countries, including Botswana, and staged raids into Rhodesian territory over the course of that period. This was the basis of the rivalry between Botswana and Rhodesia.

There were numerous such raids by rebel groups during 1969 in Rhodesia. Although I could not find a specific reference to Botswana as the base for these groups, it is clear that they were one such base throughout the entire period. One can presume that this is what is referred to as MID1335.

MID3268 was actually a skirmish between Rhodesian and Zambian troops along the borders of Rhodesia, Botswana, and Zambia in an area called the Caprivi Strip on November 20, 1974. Rhodesian government troops killed 10 guerilla soldiers in the following days.

I could not find information on MID1334.

The Botswanan government accused Rhodesian forces of crossing into Botswana three times during the first week of August 1976 and harassing five black Africans at gunpoint. Rhodesia accused black guerillas from Botswana of killing a white woman in Rhodesia on September 8, 1976. Botswanan police and Rhodesian troops clashed near the border on December 17-19, 1976. Botswanan troops and Rhodesian troops clashed near the border on January 11-21, 1977. In January of 1977, Rhodesia accused guerilla forces from Botswana of abducting 400 black students, and taking back across the border with them. Botswana claimed that the students had fled Rhodesia. A Rhodesian police officer was killed on February 20, 1977 by guerilla forces raiding from Botswana. Raids continued through most of 1978 in this manner, accounting for MID1333.

On September 6, 1977, 45 ranchers were reported abducted from a Rhodesian ranch along the border with Botswana. This was MID3124.

Rhodesian troops entered Botswana in February, 1978 and massacred several civilians. Botswanan troops and Rhodesian troops clashed near Lesoma in the Kazungula region on February 27, 1978, resulting in the deaths of 15 Botswanan soldiers and two civilians. This was MID3015.

Rhodesia accused Botswana in November of 1978 of not allowing Rhodesian refugees to return home. Botswana denied the claim. Botswanan troops and Rhodesian troops clashed near the border on January 8, 1979. Rhodesian troops entered Botswana on April 13, 1979. Botswanan troops and Rhodesian troops clashed near the border beginning on August 8, 1979. This was MID3004.

Botswanan troops and Zimbabwean troops clashed near Maitengwe on November 8 and December 20, 1983, resulting in the death of one Zimbabwean soldier. This is not classified as a MID, and for the most part one can claim an end to the rivalry between these two countries when Rhodesia was formally granted its independence on April 18, 1980. This ended the instability and grab for power that had been occurring for 15 years, as did the movement toward a more multi-racial government and military in Rhodesia in the late 1970s.

SOURCES-CR: 
Brecher and Wilkenfeld, 1997; Facts on File, December 14 1974, October 29 1977; Jessup, 1998; New York Times, August 13 1976, September 8 1976, February 1 1977, February 2 1977, February 20 1977, November 25 1978; Tillema, 1991; Wills, 1985.

PS-NARRATIVE: 

19800411-19850826 0.25

Zimbabwe became independent on April 11, 1980. On November 2, 1982, the governments of Botswana and Zimbabwe have signed an agreement establishing a joint commission of co-operation. The agreement came into effect soon after it was signed by President Masire and Prime Minister Mugabe of Zimbabwe. The signing ceremony took place at the guest house where the Botswanese President was accommodated in Harare. The objective of the commission is to strengthen and consolidate the existing political, economic and social relations between Botswana and Zimbabwe in the context of SADCC [Southern African Development Coordination Conference]. The commission shall be responsible for identifying bilateral problems in order to encourage and promote development in the two countries. The commission shall from time to time establish such special and technical committees of officials it may deem necessary in the execution of its duties, and shall propose to the Governments the necessary agreements in order to put into effect the co-operation between them. The Botswana-Zimbabwe joint commission of co-operation shall hold a meeting at least once a year on any date convenient to the two countries, and may hold extraordinary sessions when necessary; the meetings shall be held alternately in the two countries.

On June 18, 1983, the Botswanese President, Dr Masire, has said relations between Botswana and Zimbabwe are very good, contrary to reports that there had been border incidents in the two countries. In an interview today with a BBC correspondent, President Masire admitted there were differences between Botswana and Zimbabwe recently and said these differences were overplayed by the press. Dr Masire said Botswana had not deployed any troops along the border with Zimbabwe because there was no need. He said normal patrols were carried out periodically. To clear this point, Dr Masire pointed to the recent establishment of a joint commission between the two countries as well as the establishment of diplomatic relations, adding that Zimbabwe had recently appointed its High Commissioner to Botswana. He said there may be differences, but not what he would call bad relations between the two countries. President Masire said accusations that Botswana was allowing dissidents from Zimbabwe had been made through the press and added: Once in a while a politician in the heat of the moment at a Freedom Square meeting would say such things, but the Zimbabwean Government has since expressed its regret over what was said. He also disclosed that several Zimbabweans had been sent back to their country after failing to qualify for refugee status in Botswana. President Masire said that if people came with guns into Botswana, they were arrested, taken to court, tried and sentenced. The law takes its course, he said. President Masire reiterated that those who claimed to be fighting the Zimbabwean Government or behaved in a manner that could be construed as fighting the Government of Prime Minister Robert Mugabe were not allowed to stay in Botswana. Referring to the OAU summit in Addis Ababa, Dr Masire said in a way, it was just as well that the disagreements had been successfully dealt with, because in the early days the tendency was to ensure that the members agreed on everything when they did not. He said the recent summit would, therefore, afford the member states the chance to express their genuine feelings. He said the summit had strengthened the OAU as it had been realized that unless each group came to meet the other group halfway, the OAU was likely to fail. Now the member states had a chance to respect the other party's point of view, too. On domestic matters, President Masire disputed the assertions that by obtaining electricity for Gaborone from South Africa, Botswana was unnecessarily increasing its dependence on its neighbor. Dr Masire said the buying of South African electricity was only a temporary measure because Botswana was setting up its own power stations. He said: When we are through, we shall sell power to South Africa. They are helping us out now, and we will help them later. Dr Masire was referring to the Molopo power station, which is due for completion either at the end of 1985, or at the beginning of 1986. The President said Botswana was going through a difficult period at the moment because of the drought, but [words indistinct] things should work out better. Referring to South Africa's recent statements in the wake of the Pretoria bomb blast, Dr Masire repeated his statement that South Africa was preparing a psychological setting for attacking Botswana.

Botswanan troops and Zimbabwean troops clashed near Maitengwe on November 8 and December 20, 1983, resulting in the death of one Zimbabwean soldier. On 9th November, 1983 a spokesman for the Zimbabwean Ministry of Defense had denied reports from the Botswana press and radio that elements of the Zimbabwe National Army and the Botswana Defense Force had clashed about four km inside Botswana on November 8t, 1983. The Zimbabwe National Army had been under strict orders not to cross into Botswana. However, gangs of ''bandits'' had tried to infiltrate into Zimbabwe from Botswana during the past week. The Zimbabwe army had foiled the attempts but those dissidents not killed in the operation had fled into Botswana. The spokesman had said reports had indicated that the clash with the Botswana Defense Force could have involved South African-backed ''super-ZAPU'' dissidents.*Gaborone radio reported on 10th November that a meeting was due to be held in Zimbabwe that day between representatives of Botswana and Zimbabwe, to discuss ''the first exchange of fire between the Botswana Defense Force and the Zimbabwe National Army'', on 8th November, 1983. The Botswana Minister of Public Service and Information, Mr Kwelagobe, had told parliament on 9th November, 1983, that the Government was concerned about recent developments along the border with Zimbabwe.

On November 10, 1983, raiding Zimbabwe soldiers have bombarded a unit of the Botswana Defence Force with rifle fire, hand grenades and mortars in a cross-border strike four km inside Botswana. There is no reported MID in the dataset. No casualties were reported but residents of six huts destroyed by the Zimbabweans searching for anti-Government dissidents near Maitengwe on Botswana's eastern border are still missing. The strike took place early morning when a five-man Botswana patrol picked up a trail on the border, said the commander of the Botswana Defense Force, Major General Mompati Merafhe. The unit followed footprints leading into Botswana for about four km when it found 30 Zimbabwean soldiers who had been ferried in by two helicopters and a spotter plane. A statement released by Gen. Merafhe said the soldiers exchanged fire until the BDF called in reinforcements and the Zimbabweans were forced to retreat. The area is northeast of Francistown, where thousands of Zimbabwe's Ndebele tribesmen fled after a military crackdown by Prime Minister Robert Mugabe. Botswana treats the Ndebeles as refugees, and about 2,000 have refused Zimbabwe's invitation to return home. The military sweep into the Ndebele areas followed months of banditry for which Mr. Mugabe blames supporters of his political opponent, Joshua Nkomo. There was no immediate comment from the Government in Zimbabwe where the strike has gone unreported in the media. This is the second reported incident of its kind in just over a month. Zimbabwean soldiers were dropped by helicopter at Butale Village north of Francistown last month where they reportedly assaulted a leading man and demanded to know the whereabouts of dissidents. Zimbabwean authorities subsequently denied their troops were responsible. Observers say that the clash is causing considerable concern in Botswana Government circles. Opposition parties have started accusing President Quett Masire of failing to protect his countrymen and have alleged that the Botswana and Zimbabwe Governments are conspiring to allow Zimbabwe to strike at dissidents allegedly hiding in Botswana. It could become a major issue in the Botswana presidential elections scheduled for the middle of next year. Botswana consistently denies it harbors dissidents fighting against Mr. Mugabe's Government and keeps a tight check on refugees. Matabeleland farmers have been shocked by the murders of two of their colleagues in the past week. Leaders of the farming community met security commanders yesterday to be briefed on the security situation. "Morale is at rock bottom," said one farmer.

Talks were being held on December 23, 1983, at Plumtree, the border town of Zimbabwe, between representatives of the Governments of Botswana and Zimbabwe following a shoot-out around Ramokgwebane which resulted in the death of a man suspected to be a Zimbabwean soldier. There is no reported MID in the dataset. The Minister of Public Service and Information, Mr Daniel Kwelagobe, had to interrupt his current tour of the villages along the border with Zimbabwe to head a delegation to the second session of talks on the mounting tension along the border between the two countries. The first border talks were held the previous month, following the unprecedented exchange of fire between the Botswana Defense Force [BDF] and the Zimbabwe National Army [ZNA] around the Maitengwe area. The Botswana delegation comprises the Permanent Secretary to the President, Mr Festus Mogae; the Commander of the BDF, Maj-Gen Mompati Merafhe; the head of the special branch of the Botswana police, Mr (?Adolf Geshveldt); the platoon commander whose men were involved in the shoot-out, and a senior policeman in Francistown. The previous talks were held in Bulawayo, Zimbabwe. 

On June 15, 1984, Botswana's Minister of External Affairs, Mr Archibald Mogwe, said Botswana has been caused some distress by allegations that the Botswana Defense Force [BDF] is itching for a fight with Zimbabwe. Mr Mogwe said this morning in an interview that Botswana was not aware that the BDF was itching for a fight and said that the Government has done every-thing possible to develop closer co-operation between the BDF and the Zimbabwe National Army. Mr Mogwe said that he went to see the Zimbabwean Prime Minister, Robert Mugabe, on 11th June, 1984, to seek clarification of allegations regarding security matters between Botswana and Zimbabwe. He said that he found tangible evidence of allegations against the BDF and that Prime Minister Robert Mugabe specifically named the Kalangas to substantiate the allegations. Mr Mogwe said that it was unfortunate that international relations should be conducted through the news media. He said this on being asked why Zimbabwe did not approach Botswana directly. He said Botswana felt that such matters have to be discussed at an appropriate level. He said that the Zimbabwean Prime Minister will be coming to Botswana in July for the Southern African Development Coordination Conference summit in Gaborone and that it would be an additional opportunity for President Masire and Mr Mugabe to exchange views on security matters. 

On March 19, 1985, the Government of Botswana has asked the Zimbabwean authorities to lift restrictions which have prevented the export of a consignment of textiles worth more than 10,000,000 dollars to Zimbabwe. Zimbabwean customs officials have refused to allow the consignment to cross the border until a regulation is met which stipulates that imported textiles should contain some material manufactured in Zimbabwe. The Botswanan Minister of Commerce and Industry, Mr Moutakgola Nwako, has told Parliament in Gaborone that Zimbabwe's refusal to allow certain goods from Botswana through customs has caused uncertainty among local industrialists. Mr Nwako said more than 1,000 people might lose their jobs and nine factories had been forced to close down in Botswana because of Zimbabwe's customs regulations. He said nine more factories in the Francistown district in the north-east of the country were likely to follow suit. The secretary of the clothing manufacturers' association of Botswana, Mr Tim Watkins [phonetic] said that textile exports to Zimbabwe since January had been minimal and people had been retrenched as a result.

19850827-20159999 0.5 

On August 27, 1985, Botswana and Zimbabwe have concluded two days of talks on a number of issues related to restrictions on trade between the two countries. Negotiations conducted under what is described as a very friendly and constructive atmosphere were held in the Zimbabwean capital, Harare. The Botswana delegation was led by the Minister of Commerce and Industry, Mr M.P. Kwako Nwako, while his counterpart, Mr Munyaradzi, led the Zimbabwean team. A release from the Ministry says the issue of the rule of origin, which has adversely affected access of Botswana products into the Zimbabwean market, was reviewed. Recognizing Botswana's problems and realizing the importance of cordial trade relations between the two friendly neighbors, Zimbabwe agreed to immediately reduce the local content requirement under the new rules of origin in respect of clothing from 25% to 20%. This measure is expected to result in a significant number of Botswana clothing firms immediately qualifying for exporting to Zimbabwe. The Zimbabwean Minister of Trade and Commerce, Mr Munyaradzi, has agreed to urgently review the level of the clothing quota. Zimbabwe has also undertaken that in future the level of the clothing quota will be made known to Botswana in time. The Zimbabwean side raised a number of issues relating to restricted access of a number of their products into Botswana. These include maize meal and dairy products. The Botswana delegation is to urgently take up the matter with the relevant authorities and communicate to Zimbabwe as soon as possible. The two ministers stressed the need to maintain the cordial relations between their countries.

On February 7, 1987, Zimbabwe's High Commissioner to Botswana, Comrade Alois Chidoda, says close cooperation between Zimbabwe and neighboring Botswana has eased cross border activities of dissidents. Comrade Chidoda told ZIANA that some of the refugees at Dukwe camp north of Francistown are sympathizers of those who seek to subvert the government of Zimbabwe. However, the ambassador said not every Zimbabwean who fled into Botswana is a dissident or a sympathizer of the dissidents. He said his office has been involved in the co-operation to end the dissident menace, and so far many dissidents have abandoned their subversive intentions.

On 21st December, 1987, Zimbabwean Prime Minister Robert Mugabe arrived in Botswana for talks with President Masire on problems regarding bilateral trade. Mugabe was met at the airport by Masire. The radio said that under their present trade agreement, Zimbabwe and Botswana have duty-free access to each other's markets but that in 1984 Zimbabwe introduced certain restrictions. It was reported later on 21st December, 1987, that the two leaders had agreed on the formation of a task force to examine trade.

Almost all of the former Zimbabwean refugees in Botswana had now freely and voluntarily returned, the Botswana High Commissioner in Harare, Mr Phineas Makepe, said on October 3, 1989, Zimbabwe's ZIANA national news agency reported. In a speech marking Botswana's 23rd independence anniversary, Mr Makepe said this had resulted from a tripartite agreement between Zimbabwe, Botswana and the UN High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) which declared that as from the end of July 1989 any former Zimbabwean refugees who might still be in Botswana would cease to be recognized as refugees. ''Almost all the former Zimbabwean refugees at Dukwi in Botswana have now freely and voluntarily returned home to Zimbabwe with their belongings and have been assisted to resettle,'' he said. The few who had lawfully remained in Botswana were asked to regularize their stay in accordance with the laws of Botswana and to leave the refugee settlement, he added.

The partial opening of the new 10m Zimbabwe dollars (440,000 US dollars) Plumtree border post between Zimbabwe and Botswana on 17th December, 1990, will reduce the current daily congestion created by an estimated 4,000 to 5,000 shoppers from Zimbabwe, the country's immigration and customs officials said in Plumtree, western Zimbabwe. The new border post, which is used by shoppers from Zimbabwe to buy goods for resale back home at a profit, is near Botswana's Ramokguebana border post. According to the officials, it would begin partial functions on December 17th, 1990, when customs and immigration officers begin operating there. The officials said, however, that the post will be officially opened after completion of construction work in 1991.

The fourth meeting of the Botswana-Zimbabwe joint commission ended on 1st August, 1991, with the signing of a bilateral trade agreement. A news release issued at the end of the talks said that the committee noted, among other things, the need to strengthen and improve existing cooperation and to meet annually. The commission, which was established in 1982 by the leaders of the two countries, President Quett Masire and President Robert Mugabe, held its last meeting in 1988. Bilateral cooperation between Botswana and Zimbabwe covers trade, areas of (word indistinct) industry, natural resources, transport, finance, agriculture, energy and mining, education and manpower development.
Botswana has deported 4,253 illegal immigrants, mostly from neighboring countries, between January in June 1994, the official Botswana Press Agency (BOPA) reported on July 29, 1994. According to Chief Immigration Officer Peter Siele, most of those repatriated come from Zimbabwe, South Africa, Zambia and Malawi. Of those repatriated, 1,719 were arrested in the country's second city of Francistown, and another 1,545 in the capital, Gaborone. Siele said there were a "substantial" number of other illegal aliens in the country's prisons for various crimes. Many of Botswana's thieves cross over the south and northern borders with South Africa and Zimbabwe. The officer was quoted as saying some of those repatriated were as far afield as Ghana, Nigeria, Tanzania, Burundi and "some European countries", without elaborating. Many residents from the southern Africa region migrate to Botswana-a diamond-rich country-in search of work. Siele warned that strict penalties would be meted out against Botswana citizens found harboring illegal aliens. Many domestic workers and gardeners come from Zimbabwe. 

President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe left Gaborone on March 12, 1994, after a four-day visit to Botswana. He told journalists before his departure that he believed creating additional border posts, and involving local leaders and villages next to the Botswana-Zimbabwe border, could curb the problem of illegal border crossings. President Mugabe attributed the problem of illegal border crossings to unemployment, which he said is everywhere, even in Zimbabwe. He also admitted that a bureaucracy problem existed at the Zimbabwe Immigration Department, which he said hindered Botswana businessmen and women to do business. He promised that something would be done about it. 

Zimbabwe Defense Minister Moven Mahachi said on June 21, 1996, that his country was not threatened by the huge arms procurement made recently by neighboring Botswana. "We don't feel threatened. We have an excellent relationship with Botswana," he said. Botswana recent bought German-designed Leopard tanks and North American fighter bombers worth one billion Zimdollars (100 million U.S. dollars). The purchase has baffled western diplomats and political analysts, with some suggesting the buy could trigger an arms race in the region. However, Mahachi told the Zimbabwe Inter-Africa News Agency, or ZIANA, that Zimbabwe was satisfied Botswana was buying the arms for self-defense. "Botswana is a very friendly country. We don't want to interfere if our neighbors buy large arms. We have no legitimate right to ask them," he said. Botswana is reportedly expanding its army from 7,000 to 10 000 troops and officials were quoted in press reports as saying the build-up was part of a long term plan to beef up its deterrence capability. With the end of apartheid in South Africa it is unclear who Botwsana's potential enemy might be. However, one radio report has said recently that Botswana wanted to improve its capability to take part in peace-keeping operations.

The presidents of Botswana and Zimbabwe are expected to meet in Gaborone on December 9, 1999, to discuss the dispute between their two railway systems. Botswana alleges that National Railways of Zimbabwe (NRZ) is diverting traffic in order to grab for itself revenues that should come to Botswana Railways (BR). Zimbabwe President Robert Mugabe will be hosted at a State House dinner by Botswana President Festus Mogae, an official announcement said. On December 9, 1999, there will be a meeting between ministers in Mugabe's delegation and their Botswana counterparts. This will be followed by another meeting between the two presidents. "Most likely to feature are issues of trade and the national railway systems," the announcement said. Mugabe will leave Botswana later on. For some time now Mogae has been seeking a meeting with Mugabe on the railways issue. Mugabe's visit comes a day after he signed a deal with a private sector railway company to run the main Bulawayo-Mutare line for NRZ. Recently the South African railway operator, Spoornet, was subcontracted to operate the Bulawayo-Beitbridge line for the same company, Beitbridge Railway Company (BBR). The dispute between Botswana and Zimbabwe centers on Mugabe's apparent increasing privatization of sections of his railway system. The operator has chosen to cut Botswana out of routes to and from South Africa and north of Zimbabwe. "This is the first leg to connect the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) through Zambia, Zimbabwe and Mozambique," BBR chief executive Eitan Dvir (CORRECT) said as Mugabe and he signed the agreement. He refuted rumors that BBR would seek to take over the Bulawayo-Victoria Falls line which connects to Botswana, but then said a significant part of traffic from Harare to South Africa would move to Bulawayo and then down BBR's line to Beitbridge into South Africa, completely bypassing Botswana. Little rail traffic is generated in Botswana and the railway relies on transit traffic for the majority of its revenue. The BBR route uses a new stretch of track in Zimbabwe and a toll bridge at Beitbridge. The track, from West Nicholson in Zimbabwe to the border town of Beitbridge, was built by BBR to link Plumtree, Zimbabwe, with the South African network. Prior to this, traffic to South Africa diverted into Botswana at Plumtree. West Nicholson was the end of the line. BBR also refurbished Zimbabwe Railways' track north of West Nicholson. The whole exercise was an US85 million investment. An operator who holds the toll monopoly at Beitbridge has a stake in the company. Mugabe hailed the investment as a model for the future development of his transport system. Zimbabwe Railways claims that the new line has enabled traffic to move from Durban to Bulawayo in four days whereas before it took 25 days. The Zimbabwe High Commission in Botswana says that NRZ is doing no more than observing a principle of routing traffic along the shortest possible route and therefore most cost-effective route. Botswana's Minister of Transport David Magang has alleged that tariffs over the new route had been hiked by 300 percent. 

On February 29, 2000, Botswana has offered 23 million pula (about five million US dollars) to help Zimbabwe and Mozambique cope with the effects of cyclone Eline. The country's foreign minister, Lt. Gen. Mompati Merafhe, told parliament that although Botswana has also been affected by the cyclone, heavy rains and the resultant floods, the magnitude of the problem in Zimbabwe and Mozambique are far worse. While Zimbabwe will receive the assistance on commercial terms, Botswana's aid to Mozambique will be a humanitarian gesture to help with the ongoing rescue operations, he said. Merafhe confirmed that Zimbabwe, whose fuel crisis has been worsened by the cyclone, approached Botswana for assistance. He said that Harare's request included 20 million liters of fuel, 10 million liters of which will be diesel, five million liters of petrol and five million liters of Jet A1 fuel, all of which Botswana will supply on a line of credit. Merafhe asserted that Botswana currently has the capacity to supply the required amounts of petrol and diesel but not aviation fuel. However, he added that arrangements are being made to procure enough quantities of Jet A1 fuel to supply Zimbabwe. He said Botswana will donate one million liters of fuel to Mozambique to assist in the ongoing rescue operations.

On April 11, 2000, Botswana has delivered 81 oil tankers to Zimbabwe in continued assistance to its neighbor, currently in throes of a fuel crisis. According to a press release from the office of the president Tuesday, 41 tankers conveyed diesel, six transported aviation gas, while 34 tankers contained petrol, making a total of 4,521,920 liters of fuel aid that Botswana has so far delivered to Zimbabwe. The aid is part of a 23-million-pula (about five million US dollars) assistance that Botswana promised to Zimbabwe and Mozambique in February to cope with the effects of cyclone Eline. Zimbabwe, which requested 20 million liters of fuel aid, is receiving assistance on commercial terms. But Botswana's offer of one million liters of fuel aid to flood ravaged Mozambique was a humanitarian gesture which was meant to help with rescue operations. The release said that Botswana offered fuel aid out of a spirit of fraternal solidarity and good neighborliness to help the temporary economic change of fortune that Zimbabwe is currently experiencing. 

On August 10, 2000, Botswana has electrified a 30-km double barrier fence on its border with Zimbabwe to control livestock movement between the two countries. The Botswana veterinary authorities in the central district say that the new fence would also control wild animals, which usually break through the border area. Botswana, a leading cattle rearing country, took the measure to curb the spread livestock ailments like foot and mouth disease from one country to another. Currently, cattle from Botswana which cross into Zimbabwe are killed within 24-hours of their return. The owners of the cattle are then compensated for the loss. However, Zimbabwean cattle which cross into Botswana are returned back. Though the fence will stop cattle movement between the two countries, Botswana wildlife officials fear that it would aggravate the problem of rogue elephants which have been destroying property in the central district. In 1999, there were 50 reported cases of elephants damaging property in the area, which resulted in the department of wildlife paying 900 pula in compensation (5.20 pula = 1 US dollar). Botswana has exceeded its elephant carrying capacity, and now that the animals will no longer have the freedom of movement as before in the area, wildlife officials fear that they would pose a greater menace to residents.

On November 3, 2000, Botswana and Zimbabwe have expressed satisfaction by the excellent relations and co-operation particularly in combating cross-border crime by their defense and security services. The state-owned Radio Botswana reported that the view was expressed at a meeting of the permanent commission on defense and security in Victoria Falls, Zimbabwe. It said the two sides emphasized the importance of using new techniques to fight crime and underscored the need to exchange intelligence related to contraband goods. They re-affirmed the need to facilitate the movement of people, goods and services across the common border. According to the radio, the commission expressed concern about developments that threaten regional stability and security, saying that they hinder economic progress and regional integration. The meeting condemned Jonas Savimbi's UNITA rebel movement for waging a senseless war on the people of Angola. The two countries re-asserted support for concerted efforts to sustain sanctions against UNITA. It expressed concern on delay in implementing the provisions of the Lusaka cease-fire agreement on the conflict in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Meanwhile, traditional leaders in Botswana living along the common border with Zimbabwe have called for increased border patrols to curb rising crime in their villages. They expressed concern at the increase in livestock rustling, burglaries and shop-breaking. Recently, rustlers stole cattle from Botswana and drove them into Zimbabwe after cutting through the border fence.

On August 14, 2002, Botswana and Zimbabwe are set for a diplomatic row after the Botswana Agricultural Union (BAU) invited white Zimbabwe farmers to come and invest in the country. Speaking in Gaborone, BAU chief executive officer Bowetswe Masilo said white Zimbabwean farmers who are fleeing after confiscation of their farms should be encouraged to come to Botswana and revive the ailing agricultural sector. He encouraged the farmers to cross-over in droves and invest in Botswana. "They are welcome to invest in the country. Their expertise would benefit the agricultural sector in the country," Masilo said. He added that the Zimbabwean farmers should be encouraged to form joint ventures with their Batswana counterparts. "The best thing that they should do is to try to form joint ventures with the local farmers. This would greatly benefit the agricultural sector in the country. The local farmers will be able to help them with land and to acquire resident permits, among other things," he added. The call is likely to worsen diplomatic tension between both countries over white farmers who have been given orders by the Zimbabwe government to vacate their farms to settle landless blacks. Zimbabwe has already complained to Botswana for giving audience to 17 representatives of Zimbabwe Commercial Farmers Union (CFU). The ZFU delegation was in Botswana recently to explore opportunities for relocating and held discussions with agriculture officials. However, the Botswana government told the farmers it has got only 4000 hectares of land in Pandamatenga area and urged them to seek partnership in Tuli Block. Botswana, with a sparse population of 1.6 million, saw its agricultural sector's contribution to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) plunge from 65 percent when it attained independence in 1966 to three percent at present. 

In what could result in a diplomatic row between Zimbabwe and Botswana, the alleged harassment of Botswana nationals in Zimbabwe was highlighted on November 15, 2002, during a parliamentary debate in Gaborone on President Festus Mogae's State of the Nation address. Contributing to the debate, Botswana's North East member of parliament, Chapson Butale, complained about the treatment of Botswana nationals in Zimbabwe, especially in Bulawayo. The MP alleged a number of students had been assaulted in the city while another one was stabbed with a knife. Reports to the police had not achieved anything. He said Zimbabwean police did not entertain complaints by Botswana students. "The students reported the assaults to the Zimbabwean police only to be told that the Zimbabweans were retaliating," said Butale. A number of Zimbabweans have reportedly been ill-treated on visits to Botswana. However, police spokesman Wayne Bvudzijena dismissed the allegations, saying that the Zimbabwe Republic Police had no culture of harassing foreigners. "If an offence is committed there are procedures to follow and we communicate with embassies. We also hold joint meetings with Botswana police," Bvudzijena said. "The Botswana police have not mentioned these allegations in our regular meetings with them and we wonder where they are coming from." The two countries' media have given much attention to the alleged inhuman treatment of their respective citizens by the other nationals. The Bulawayo-based Chronicle last month carried articles reporting brutality against Zimbabweans by Batswana while Botswana's main newspaper, Mmegi, carried stories highlighting what they termed Zimbabwe police harassment of its nationals. Butale said Botswana nationals were required to pay transport fees in pula while they were in Zimbabwe. He also questioned the relevance of bilateral meetings between Zimbabwe and Botswana and argued that they benefited the Zimbabweans only. The trading of these accusations began immediately after Botswana criticized President Mugabe's land reforms and then demanded payment for a 20-million-litre fuel credit line it extended to the government in March 2000. Allegations of Zimbabwean police brutality worsened last month when a Botswana customary court president and a police officer alleged harassment while they were in Zimbabwe.

On December 2, 2002, the government of Zimbabwe has recalled Zimbabwe's High Commissioner to Botswana after comments by Botswana's President Festus Mogae that there is a "drought of good governance" in Zimbabwe. Dr Stan Mudenge the Minister of Foreign Affairs could not be reached for comment, but the Johannesburg-based Saturday Star reported that although there was no immediate suggestion nor confirmation that High Commissioner Zenzo Nsimbi had been recalled because of Mogae's recent criticism of Mugabe's policies, "this would seem likely". Mogae has emerged as one of the few African leaders to publicly attack President Mugabe over the deteriorating political and humanitarian situation in Zimbabwe. Mogae recently said Mugabe's political and economic policies were hurting the entire southern African region. About half of Zimbabwe's population is threatened with famine due to food shortages. Aid agencies blame the shortages on disturbances to commercial agriculture and drought due to the government's chaotic land reform program. Mogae recently told the London-based African Business magazine that Zimbabwe's woes were the result of a "drought of good governance". He also told the BBC's HardTalk program that tourism had been negatively affected by events in Zimbabwe and that Botswana was suffering as a result. Cecil Manyeula, the Botswana High Commissioner to Zimbabwe, said he had only read of Nsimbi's withdrawal in the Botswana media. "I have only read reports in the Botswana media just like everyone else. I do not know the reason but I am made to understand that a new envoy has already taken residence in Botswana, which means Nsimbi has been recalled because there cannot be two envoys," he said. "But I do not know the reason, in any case, why should I know?" The Botswana Guardian newspaper reported that Nsimbi had been recalled after complaints about his inaction regarding the plight of Zimbabweans allegedly being ill-treated by Botswana authorities. Zimbabweans, who say they are escaping economic hardships, have been travelling into Botswana through the Plumtree border post or illegally sneaking past dry river beds that separate the two countries, the paper said. However, Nsimbi said the claims were difficult to prove: "We receive these allegations from Zimbabweans but they do not bring concrete evidence. We have also established that their allegations were false."

The bilateral talks between visiting US President George W. Bush and Botswana President Festus Mogae would not change Botswana's policy towards Zimbabwe, Botswana's Foreign Minister Mompati Merafhe said on July 10, 2003. Bush earlier said there should be democracy in Zimbabwe to enable the people to advance and the United States would continue to speak out on that. At a news conference on the talks between Mogae and Bush, Merafhe said in Gaborone, capital of Botswana, "The issue is one of a process of persuasion. We cannot dictate to a sovereign state. We have 640 km of border with Zimbabwe. It is important that we continue to hold dialogues." She said Botswana would keep the lines of communication open and could facilitate a resolution but it cannot become "the policeman of Zimbabwe." "Botswana cannot be the front runner in the resolution of the situation. We are neighbors, we have to do business with them. We cannot be antagonistic."

Zimbabwe has condemned the "barbaric" use of corporal punishment by neighboring Botswana against Zimbabweans caught on the wrong side of the law in their country, a newspaper said on May 11, 2004. Relations between Zimbabwe and its western neighbor have been strained in recent years following regular reports that Zimbabweans are harassed, flogged or attacked while in Botswana. Zimbabwe's chief immigration officer Elasto Mugwadi told the state-run Herald after a recent visit to Botswana that the country's use of corporal punishment against Zimbabweans was unfair. "Although Botswana immigration officials indicated they cannot change their custom, we informed them that their custom is archaic and barbaric," said Mugwadi. Last month Botswana dismissed the media reports as hostile and distorted. In January, 2004, Zimbabwe's ambassador to Botswana was asked to investigate reports that 100 Zimbabweans were flogged for illegally entering Botswana. An estimated 125,000 Zimbabweans who have been flooding into Botswana every month to escape economic problems at home have been blamed for an upswing in crime in that country. Mugwadi said that Zimbabweans who break the law in Botswana should pay a fine, be deported or be sent to prison. However, he claimed Zimbabweans arrested in Botswana have their money confiscated and are beaten. "They are left with no choice but to be lashed naked before they are deported," he told The Herald.

Commander of the Botswana Defense Forces Lieutenant General Louis Matshwenyega Fisher was in Zimbabwe on May 15, 2004, on a reciprocal visit following a similar visit to Botswana by his Zimbabwean counterpart. Fisher toured the National Heroes Acre in Harare where he laid a wreath at the tomb of the Unknown Soldier. Earlier Fisher, who is reciprocating a visit to Botswana by Zimbabwe Defense Forces Commander Constantine Chiwenga, paid a courtesy call on Zimbabwean Minister of Defense Sydney Sekeramayi. He later toured the Zimbabwe Staff College and the Regional Peacekeeping Training Center at the Army Headquarters in Harare. Fisher is expected to visit some farms to familiarize himself with the country's land reform program.

Businessmen who operate in both Botswana and Zimbabwe would in future be taxed only once. This comes after the signing of an agreement between the two countries on August 5, 2004, approved by the Botswana Parliament. But some MPs expressed caution about dealing with countries like Zimbabwe. "I have nothing against Zimbabwe, but our colleagues always think we could only be used as a market and not as producers. They stopped our railways business and decided to do business with our neighbors at Beit Bridge," commented the MP for Maun/Chobe, Bahiti Temane. "We also want to protect our interests. Our sense of accommodating others should not be taken for granted. We don't want to be taken for granted by other people." Temane said even the Zimbabwe media continues to write distasteful articles about Botswana. Minister of trade and industry, Jacob Nkate, said before its economic collapse, Zimbabwe was Botswana's second largest trading partner after South Africa. He said there was a desire on the part of Zimbabwe to open up and do business with Botswana. "The desire is there for both partners to do business. If there are some problems, we should not exacerbate them," he said, adding that there are indications that the ailing Zimbabwean economy would recuperate. He said Botswana should be making preparations now and not when the Zimbabwean economy is booming. Nkate said the Botswana-Zimbabwe Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement is important for people in the northern part of the country who do business in Botswana and Zimbabwe. The minister of finance and development planning Baledzi Gaolathe said Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements are entered into for the purpose of promoting the flow of investments and services between countries. Such agreements, he said, mitigate hardship or an additional tax burden that may result in the taxing of income in both countries. Gaolathe revealed that SADC has developed Model Double Taxation Agreements for member countries to ensure a common approach to negotiations of tax treaties outside the region. To this end, he said, Botswana has embarked on a concerted effort to negotiate tax agreements with other SADC countries and the rest of the world. "So far, government has concluded eight Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements with Zimbabwe, the United Kingdom, South Africa, Sweden, Mauritius, France, Russia and Namibia," he said. He said negotiations for a Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement between Botswana and Zimbabwe commenced in 1995 and were finalized this year. The Agreement covers all taxes relating to income and gains on disposal of property as well as similar taxes to be imposed in the countries in future. However, special tax agreements entered into, with mining companies, are not subject to the provisions of the Agreement, Parliament was told. Gaolathe said the Agreement would come into effect after both countries have provided notification that their ratification procedures have been completed.

On August 29, 2004, the government officials from Zimbabwe and Botswana are discussing the issue of ill treatment of Zimbabweans and other security matters affecting bilateral relations. Zimbabwean Home Affairs Minister Kembo Mohadi was quoted as saying that the officials from the two countries' ministries of home affairs and defense and security have been locked in meetings since Tuesday in Vumba in Bulawayo province of Zimbabwe. He said the issue of ill treatment of Zimbabweans is on the agenda. The two neighboring countries have been talking about the issue for some time. "Our immigration officials have been there (Botswana) and they promised to look into the issue, so we will obviously want to hear the progress," he said. It is said that a number of Zimbabweans have been subjected to dehumanizing treatment such as being flogged in public by Botswana traditional leaders and some others have even been beaten to death by Zimbabwean security agents, who accuse them of spreading foot-and-mouth disease and committing various crimes including prostitution. Meanwhile, Mohadi said security at the country's port of entries is tight due to the continuation of smuggling of goods and human beings. "We have deployed quite heavily on the ground at the borders to thwart criminal activities and we are dealing with people who can sometimes elude the net," Mohadi said.

On September 8, 2004, the government of Botswana has turned down proposals by Zimbabwe for a bilateral information pact, ZimOnline has learnt. The information agreement between the two nations, whose relations have soured in the last two years, would have provided for Harare and Gaborone to help each other counter alleged negative media coverage against them. Zimbabwe's Information Minister Jonathan Moyo proposed the idea of the pact to his Botswana counterpart Boyce Sebetela when he visited Harare last month. The proposed pact met stiff opposition from President Festus Mogae's office and from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. They are said to have objected to the pact for fear it could be used to violate freedom of the press. "The Botswana government is against the idea as it is tantamount to gagging the press. We have seen cases of press freedom violations in Zimbabwe and we don't want to be part of that," said a source, who asked not to be named. Both Sebetela and Moyo could not be reached for comment on the matter. Zimbabwe has some of the harshest media laws in the world. In the last 12 months alone, three newspapers including the country's biggest and only privately-owned daily paper were shut down for failing to register with the government's media commission. Harare accuses Gaborone of hosting a radio station that it says broadcasts anti-government propaganda into Zimbabwe. Botswana denies the charge. Relations between the two southern African nations have also soured over allegations by Zimbabwe that Botswana ill-treats its nationals visiting that country.

Botswana is optimistic about Zimbabwe's future as a breadbasket of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) region and beyond, despite current hurdles imposed by droughts and sanctions, said Botswana President Festus Mogae on August 28, 2006. Mogae made the remarks while officially opening the 2006 Zimbabwe Agricultural Show in Harare. He arrived in Harare for a two-day official visit to Zimbabwe. With the eventual removal of the setbacks resulting from the agrarian reforms which were a necessary development in the history of Zimbabwe and full utilization of the land, Zimbabwean agriculture is set to soar to greater heights, Mogae said. He said as neighbors and members of SADC and the African Union, Zimbabwe and Botswana are like members of a family, compelled to work together for the betterment of the people and generations to come. In the area of trade, he said Zimbabwe remains Botswana's second largest regional trading partner after South Africa and that in recent years trade between the two countries has been growing for the mutual benefit of the two countries. He said over 50 companies registered in Botswana have significant Zimbabwean shareholding, thereby promoting cross border investment between Zimbabwe and Botswana through joint ventures. A new bilateral treaty on the reciprocal promotion of investments between the two countries is expected to come to fruition soon, said Mogae. Mogae highlighted other areas of cooperation between the two countries such as food security jointly with Namibia and Zambia, the area of control of transboundary animal diseases, high pathogenic notificable avian influenza control and the harmonization of seed standards and regulations to facilitate movement of improved seed within SADC. The Botswana leader paid tribute to President Robert Mugabe for his unwavering contribution and commitment to peace and solidarity in the SADC region citing the Zimbabwe defense forces' contributions to peace in Mozambique, the Democratic Republic of Congo, and South Africa. He said exhibitions such as the Harare agricultural show are ample opportunities for the region to market its products, attract investment and strengthen trade within and amongst the countries. 

The 24th session of the Botswana-Zimbabwe Joint Permanent Commission on Defense and Security ended in south Zimbabwe city of Masvingo on November 11, 2006, after intensive deliberations on critical bilateral issues. The four-day meeting discussed bilateral issues of mutual interest in areas of defense and state and public security between Zimbabwe and Botswana. In a statement issued at the end of the meeting held at Great Zimbabwe, the Minister of State for National Security, Lands, Land Reform and Resettlement Didymus Mutasa said the commission discussed a wide range of issues that were pertinent to Botswana and Zimbabwe and also of concern to the region. These included wildlife matters, stock theft, illicit trafficking of drugs, gold, diamonds, firearms and the containment of general crime along the common border, immigration and customs issues. The commission also applauded the co-operation and communication that exists at provincial and operational levels and urged this interaction to continue, said Mutasa. Zimbabwe and Botswana's co-operation in wildlife management including the establishment of the Shashe/Limpopo and Kavango/ Zambezi Transfrontier Conservation areas was greatly appreciated by the commission which hailed the move as an indication of close cooperation. To this end, the commission also hailed the donation of a male black rhino to Botswana by Zimbabwe as a gesture of goodwill that sought to further strengthen existing cordial relations. Mutasa said the commission also expressed satisfaction at the conclusion of the memorandum of understanding on the construction of Kazungula Bridge by Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe, especially as the bridge was going to play a pivotal role in the region's socio-economic development. In response, Botswana Minister of Presidential Affairs and Public Administration Phandu Skelemani hailed the joint permanent commission on defense and security between the two countries which he said had been a successful platform to amicably solve any sticking problems between the two countries. Skelemani said the commission was a platform to come up with developmental initiatives that could benefit the people of Botswana and Zimbabwe. He also extended an invitation to the Zimbabwean delegation to attend the 25th session that will be hosted by Botswana in 2007. 

PS-SOURCES: BBC November 2, 1982; June 18, 1983; November 10 1983; November 11, 1983; December 23, 1983; June 18, 1984; March 19, 1985; August 27, 1985; February 10, 1987; December 23, 1987; October 3, 1989; December 19, 1990; August 13, 1991; March 12, 1994; Africa News June 21, 1996; February 29, 2000; August 10, 2000; November 3, 2000; November 15, 2002; December 2, 2002; August 5, 2004; November 15, 2006; SAPA December 9, 1999; Panafrican News Agency April 11, 2000; August 14, 2002; September 8, 2004; Agence France Presse May 11, 2004; Xinhua July 10, 2003; May 15, 2004; August 29, 2004; August 28, 2006; November 11, 2006; Zimbabwe Independent August 4, 2006; Deutsche Presse-Agentur July 29, 1994

MARITIME-MIDS:

MARITIME-DISPUTE:

Discussion:

SOURCES: Gibler, D.M. 2018. Militarized Interstate Dispute Narratives, 1816-2010. Langham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. 

Gibler, D. M., S. V. Miller, and E. K. Little. 2016. "An Analysis of the Militarized Interstate Dispute (MID) Dataset, 1816-2001." International Studies Quarterly. 60 (4): 719-730.

The Internal Security Situation. Keesings Contemporary Archives, February 1976. Volume 22, page 27602.
