FILE: cm560571v11.0.txt
DYAD: SOUTH AFRICA-BOTSWANA
RIVALRY: RIV1166
DISPUTE(S): MID3031 MID3030 MID2580 MID2810 MID2754 

RIVNOTES: 

PS: 19660930-19840825 0.25 19840826-19900201 0.00 19900202-19940426 -9 19940427-20209999 0.5

PS-UPDATE2020:

PSNOTES: 

PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20220320
PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20220320

Territorial-Maritime-Boundary Issues Variables

MID3031 

TERRMID: MID3031 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID3031 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID3031 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID3031 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID3031 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID3031 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID3031 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID3031 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID3031 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID3031 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID3031 from Gibler 2018, South Africa was experiencing domestic turmoil in resistance to its regime and tried to coerce Botswana into signing a non-aggression pact. Botswana did not comply, South Africa began war games at the border with Botswana, and a minor clash occurred. Coded civil war MID because there were militarized rebels targeting the South African regime at the time, contributing to the domestic turmoil against the regime in South Africa.

CIVWARLINK: MID3031 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID3031 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID3031 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID3031 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID3031 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID3031 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID3030 

TERRMID: MID3030 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID3030 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID3030 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID3030 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID3030 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID3030 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID3030 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID3030 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID3030 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID3030 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID3030 from Gibler 2018, in 1985 South Africa attacked rebels inside of Botswana, triggering this MID. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to militarized rebels in Botswana/South Africa, within this dyad. 

CIVWARLINK: MID3030 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID3030 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID3030 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID3030 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID3030 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID3030 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID2580 

TERRMID: MID2580 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID2580 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID2580 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID2580 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID2580 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID2580 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID2580 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID2580 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID2580 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID2580 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID2580 from Gibler 2018, in 1986 South Africa launched attacks against rebel targets in Botswana. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to militarized rebels in Botswana/South Africa, within this dyad.

CIVWARLINK: MID2580 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID2580 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID2580 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID2580 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID2580 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID2580 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID2810 

TERRMID: MID2810 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID2810 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID2810 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID2810 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID2810 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID2810 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID2810 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID2810 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID2810 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID2810 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID2810 from Gibler 2018, South Africa warned Zambia and Botswana that it would not allow their territories to be used by rebels to travel and attack South Africa. South Africa conducted several attacks on rebels in Botswana and Zambia in 1987. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to militarized rebel activity in Botswana/South Africa, within this dyad. 

CIVWARLINK: MID2810 1 -- civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID2810 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID2810 this MID also involved militarized rebels in Zambia, outside this dyad. 

COUPMID: MID2810 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID2810 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID2810 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID2810 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID2754 

TERRMID: MID2754 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID2754 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID2754 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID2754 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID2754 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID2754 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID2754 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID2754 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID2754 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID2754 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID2754 from Gibler 2018, South Africa accused Botswana of supporting rebels who were targeting the South African regime, and clashes occurred between the countries. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to Botswana supporting militarized rebels against South Africa, and both states are in this dyad. 

CIVWARLINK: MID2754 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID2754 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID2754 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID2754 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID2754 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID2754 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

NARRATIVE-CM:
Botswana troops and South African troops clashed near the border on March 29, 1978, resulting in the deaths of three South African soldiers. Botswana opposed the apartheid policies of neighboring South Africa and supported the African National Congress (ANC). Botswanan troops and South African troops clashed near the Botswana-Namibia border on October 25, 1984. Some 50 South African troops attacked ANC targets in Gaborone, Botswana on June 14, 1985, resulting in the deaths in some 15 individuals. Botswana admitted giving asylum to refugees from South Africa, but denied giving military support to ANC rebels. Britain, France, India, and the United States condemned South Africa on June 15, 1985. Commonwealth of Nations (CON) Secretary-General Sonny Ramphal condemned South Africa on June 15, 1985. Botswana referred the matter to the United Nations (UN) Security Council on June 15, 1985. The UN Security Council condemned South Africa on June 21, 1985. South African troops attacked ANC targets in Mogoditshane in Botswana on May 19, 1986, resulting in the death of one individual. The European Community (EC), Britain, Soviet Union, and the US condemned South Africa on May 19, 1986. President Abdou Diouf of Senegal, chairman of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), condemned South Africa on May 19, 1986. The Organization of the Front Line States (OFLS), UN Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar, and Commonwealth of Nations (CON) Secretary-General Shridath Ramphal condemned South Africa on May 20, 1986. China condemned South Africa on May 20, 1986. The US and Britain vetoed a UN Security Council resolution on May 23, 1986, which would have condemned the attacks and imposed mandatory economic sanctions against South Africa. South African troops attacked ANC rebels in Botswana on January 1, 1987. South African troops attacked ANC rebels near Gaborone, Botswana on March 28, 1988, resulting in the deaths of four Botswanans.

The Botswana police arrested two white South African commandos early on June 22, 1988, after a gun battle in which three policemen were wounded, the Government of the neighboring black-ruled nation said. A statement said the South African commandos opened fire on the Botswana police after the officers surprised them near a railroad line at Kgale mission, 12 miles south of Gaborone, the capital, near the border with South Africa. Botswana authorities said the commandos, whom they identified as Cpl. Johannes Basson, 25 years old, and Theodore Hermanhen, 30, were planning a raid on Gaborone. The statement said one of the policemen wounded was in critical condition. Botswana's President, Quett K. Masire, accused South Africa of an ''act of state terrorism.'' The Pretoria Government's forces have launched raids into Botswana each year for the last four years, ostensibly to strike at targets of the outlawed African National Congress. Botswana denies that it provides transit facilities to the guerrillas. The South African military said in a statement tonight that an army patrol engaged in a mission against African National Congress guerrillas was involved in a ''skirmish'' with Botswana police early today. It added that the men had been gathering information in connection with suspected infiltrators.

On December 28, 1988, the Botswanan government regarded a bomb explosion in Gaborone West as the latest South Africa's acts of aggression against Botswana, said a press release from the office of the Botswana president. A 14-year old school boy was killed in the bomb explosion. The Botswana government said the bomb attack comes only 16 days after the raid on Ditlharapeng village near Botswana's southern border with South Africa and only 12 days after the meeting of security officials of Botswana and South Africa in Gaborone on December 15. Botswana is concerned that such attacks are continuing despite the fact that Botswana and South Africa have reached an agreement recently to hold regular talks aimed at addressing the security concerns of the two countries. The bomb explosion was the fourth raid against Botswana by South Africa on December 28, 1988.

On October 27, 1989, the violation of Botswana airspace by South Africa has just been catalogued in a report about that country's destabilization of the frontline states and their neighbors at the Commonwealth summit conference in Kuala Lumpur, as extracted from a book entitled ''Apartheid Terrorism''. The startling report, presented to the heads of state by the chairman of the frontline states, President Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia, lays bare the sheer contempt and disrespect with which the regime in Pretoria is executing its wanton scheme of extreme provocation against a peaceful democratic state. Statistics of Botswana Defense Force, BDF, show that 23 air violations were recorded between February 1985 and August 1988, apart from countless others that went undetected, according to the report.

On February 9, 1990, Botswana President Dr. Quett Masire said that Botswana will not consider diplomatic relations with South Africa until the apartheid system is removed. During an interview with South African Corporation's TV News in Gaborone, the Botswanan leader said that the time is not yet ripe for Botswana to open a diplomatic mission in South Africa. "It is our long standing policy of awaiting the emergence of a free and democratic South Africa before establishing diplomatic relations with Pretoria," he said. Although both Botswana and South Africa are members of the South African Customs Union, Gaborone still holds that South Africa is under an apartheid regime. On Pretoria's accusations that Botswana has been used as a launching pad for attacks on South Africa, president Masire said that Pretoria has never produced evidence to back its claims, adding that the root cause of the problems in South Africa is the apartheid system. President Masire however said he is glad that the South African government has at last come round to accept the fact that apartheid is the cause of its problems. Asked whether there is the need for the continued existence of the frontline group after Namibia's independence and the normalization of the situation in South Africa, Masire said: "I think it is premature to think of the dissolution of the frontline states grouping at this stage." Referring to South African president F.W. de Klerk's announcement, the Botswana leader said that the process of bringing about peace in South Africa has a bearing on Botswana because peace in that country would mean peace in the region. "De Klerk has taken a bold step and we urge him to complete the process without delay." President Masire also called for the immediate release of black nationalist leader Nelson Mandela and other political prisoners and lifting of the state of emergency in order to create a climate conducive to negotiating a peaceful end to apartheid.

SOURCES-CM: 
Sources: Africa Research Bulletin (ARB), April 1-30, 1978, July 15, 1985, February 15, 1986, June 15, 1986, April 15, 1988; Brecher and Wilkenfeld, 1997, 470-471, 477-478; Christian Science Monitor (CSM), March 29, 1988; Dale, 1987, 73-91; Keesing, March 1985; Weisburd, 1997, 92-94.

NARRATIVE-CR:
South Africa and Botswana had five MIDs between August of 1984 and July of 1988. The basis for the rivalry between these two states was the support that the Botswanan government gave to the African National Congress (ANC) and its opposition to the apartheid policies of the South African government. Consequently, the South African government maintained a policy of destabilization in Botswana and other South African states that opposed its regime. The purpose of this policy was to leverage Botswana both militarily and economically into a more favorable stance toward South Africa. Most of the MIDs that made up this rivalry were skirmishes along the border between South African troops and rebels who had sought refuge within Botswanan territory. 

Botswanan troops and South African troops clashed near the Botswana-Namibia border on October 25, 1984. This was MID3031. MID3030 occurred when some 50 South African troops attacked ANC targets in Gaborone, Botswana on June 14, 1985, resulting in the deaths in some 15 individuals. South African troops attacked ANC targets in Mogoditshane in Botswana on May 19, 1986, resulting in the death of one individual, composing MID2580. South African troops attacked ANC rebels in Botswana on January 1, 1987. MID2810 actually was a raid by South African forces into Zambia on April 25, 1987. It was very close to the border of Botswana though, and revolved around the South African governments attempts to strike at the rebel forces receiving safe harbor in neighboring states. MID2754 occurred when South African troops attacked ANC rebels near Gaborone, Botswana on March 28, 1988, resulting in the deaths of four Botswanans.

Because Botswana's economy was heavily reliant upon South Africa, the extent of its opposition to the South African regime was somewhat limited as well. Many workers migrate from Botswana to South Africa for employment. Part of South Africa's destabilization policy toward Botswana and other South African states that opposed its policies was to keep their economies weak. Their weakness and reliance upon South Africa minimized the threat that they posed.

The late 1980s brought about dramatic changes in the South African government, which changed the nature of relations between the two states. In 1989, Pretoria abandoned its policy of regional destabilization, which lessened the strains between the two countries. The ANC as well as 59 other previously illegal organizations were legalized on February 2, 1990. Over the next several months, the South African government saw the institution of a new constitution and an end to apartheid. Nelson Mandela, who had been a prisoner for nearly 30 years for his leadership in opposition to the South African government, was freed and became president. 

Because of these changes in the domestic system of South Africa, the basis for the rivalry has ended. 

The Botswana police arrested two white South African commandos early on June 22, 1988, after a gun battle in which three policemen were wounded, the Government of the neighboring black-ruled nation said. A statement said the South African commandos opened fire on the Botswana police after the officers surprised them near a railroad line at Kgale mission, 12 miles south of Gaborone, the capital, near the border with South Africa. Botswana authorities said the commandos, whom they identified as Cpl. Johannes Basson, 25 years old, and Theodore Hermanhen, 30, were planning a raid on Gaborone. The statement said one of the policemen wounded was in critical condition. Botswana's President, Quett K. Masire, accused South Africa of an ''act of state terrorism.'' The Pretoria Government's forces have launched raids into Botswana each year for the last four years, ostensibly to strike at targets of the outlawed African National Congress. Botswana denies that it provides transit facilities to the guerrillas. The South African military said in a statement tonight that an army patrol engaged in a mission against African National Congress guerrillas was involved in a ''skirmish'' with Botswana police early today. It added that the men had been gathering information in connection with suspected infiltrators.

On December 28, 1988, the Botswanan government regarded a bomb explosion in Gaborone West as the latest South Africa's acts of aggression against Botswana, said a press release from the office of the Botswana president. A 14-year old school boy was killed in the bomb explosion. The Botswana government said the bomb attack comes only 16 days after the raid on Ditlharapeng village near Botswana's southern border with South Africa and only 12 days after the meeting of security officials of Botswana and South Africa in Gaborone on December 15. Botswana is concerned that such attacks are continuing despite the fact that Botswana and South Africa have reached an agreement recently to hold regular talks aimed at addressing the security concerns of the two countries. The bomb explosion was the fourth raid against Botswana by South Africa on December 28, 1988.

On October 27, 1989, the violation of Botswana airspace by South Africa has just been catalogued in a report about that country's destabilization of the frontline states and their neighbors at the Commonwealth summit conference in Kuala Lumpur, as extracted from a book entitled ''Apartheid Terrorism''. The startling report, presented to the heads of state by the chairman of the frontline states, President Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia, lays bare the sheer contempt and disrespect with which the regime in Pretoria is executing its wanton scheme of extreme provocation against a peaceful democratic state. Statistics of Botswana Defense Force, BDF, show that 23 air violations were recorded between February 1985 and August 1988, apart from countless others that went undetected, according to the report.

On February 9, 1990, Botswana President Dr. Quett Masire said that Botswana will not consider diplomatic relations with South Africa until the apartheid system is removed. During an interview with South African Corporation's TV News in Gaborone, the Botswanan leader said that the time is not yet ripe for Botswana to open a diplomatic mission in South Africa. "It is our long standing policy of awaiting the emergence of a free and democratic South Africa before establishing diplomatic relations with Pretoria," he said. Although both Botswana and South Africa are members of the South African Customs Union, Gaborone still holds that South Africa is under an apartheid regime. On Pretoria's accusations that Botswana has been used as a launching pad for attacks on South Africa, president Masire said that Pretoria has never produced evidence to back its claims, adding that the root cause of the problems in South Africa is the apartheid system. President Masire however said he is glad that the South African government has at last come round to accept the fact that apartheid is the cause of its problems. Asked whether there is the need for the continued existence of the frontline group after Namibia's independence and the normalization of the situation in South Africa, Masire said: "I think it is premature to think of the dissolution of the frontline states grouping at this stage." Referring to South African president F.W. de Klerk's announcement, the Botswana leader said that the process of bringing about peace in South Africa has a bearing on Botswana because peace in that country would mean peace in the region. "De Klerk has taken a bold step and we urge him to complete the process without delay." President Masire also called for the immediate release of black nationalist leader Nelson Mandela and other political prisoners and lifting of the state of emergency in order to create a climate conducive to negotiating a peaceful end to apartheid.

SOURCES-CR: 
Barber and Barrett, 1990; Brecher and Wilkenfeld, 1997; Broderick, Burford, and Freer, 2001; Dzimba, 1998; Toronto Star, April 26 1987;

PS-NARRATIVE: 

19660930-19840825 0.25

Botswana became independent on September 30, 1966. South Africa was bypassing the global embargo on its products by selling products from South African-owned companies based in Gaborone, Botswana, was stated on November 25, 1967. On April 18, 1970, South Africa sent a stiff note to Sir Seretse Khama, President of Botswana, rejecting the latter's claim that Botswana has a common border with Zambia. South Africa was trying to block the building of a bridge between Botswana and Zambia in order to block the easy movement of black anti-apartheid guerillas which could affect its territory.

On November 23, 1977, the Minister of External Affairs of Botswana A.M. Mogwe denounced once more the policy of "Bantustan" in South Africa and expressed his firm non-recognition of "Bophuthatswana homeland" which will be "independent" on December 6, 1977. Speaking at the fourth session of third parliament of Botswana, Mogwe said: "We reject the Bantustan policy because we believe it is unjust and therefore cannot be the answer to the racial problems of South Africa. The Botswana government therefore decided sometime ago that it would not recognize and independence of any Bantustan." Mogwe also said: "although we shall not recognize Bophuthatswana travel documents, we shall nevertheless make it possible for the people of this Bantustan to visit Botswana" and "we hope that Botswana citizens wishing to visit friends and relatives in Bophuthatswana will be accorded similar treatment by the Bophuthatswana authorities". He said, in so doing, Botswana reiterated its "rejection of the Bantustan policy without disrupting the many relationships which exist between the people of Botswana and those of the various Bantustans" without imposing unnecessary hardships on the innocent victims of the Bantustan system. Botswana shares a common border with part of Bophuthatswana's territories, and the majority of the people of Botswana and Bophuthatswana belong to the same national grouping-the Tswanas.

On October 18, 1979, the leader of the Botswana National Front opposition party, Dr Kenneth Koma, says two days are enough to make Botswana starve should South Africa apply economic sanctions against Botswana. Addressing a political rally in Gaborne, on the eve of the country's general elections, he said provision should have been made by the ruling party to allow people to survive in the event of a crisis between South Africa and Botswana. He said Botswana depended on South Africa economically, but if the country had a government that had a clear political direction in policies it should have by now reached a stage where it would be making preparations for economic disengagement from South Africa. 

Botswana is a case study of economist setting the framework within which politics can operate. While Botswana is ideologically opposed to apartheid, its economic dependency on South Africa allows only so much freedom to oppose Pretoria's policies. In early 1981, South Africa served notice that the government of its black-ruled neighbor had better not go too far. On Jan. 15, 1981, Botswana's main paper reported "unprovoked" small-arms attacks by South African troops on isolated Botswana defense force outposts in the north. While it is difficult to establish what did happen in the northern bush, the country's January petroleum allotment-which comes from South African refineries via South African railways-was inexplicably reduced. As a result, the government's central fuel depot ran out of supplies for several days in mid-January, and a number of garages in Gaborone, the capital city, had to reduce their sales. Nearby, a government oil storage complex capable of holding a three-month reserve still stands empty, although the tanks were completed in early 1980: South Africa has yet to make the necessary reserves available. Most rural villages and nearly two-thirds of the nation's cattle herd, the predominant source of rural income in semi-arid Botswana, depend on diesel-powered borehole pumps for water. Thus a prolonged petroleum products embargo is a serious threat that South Africa can manipulate as it wants. What Pretoria fears is that neighboring black-run states increasingly may become launching points for guerrilla attacks into South Africa, such as the bombing last May of the coal-to-gasoline plant, Sasol. South Africa also may be reacting against a tough Christmas message by Botswana's President, Quett Masire, which called for the day when "the oppressed people of Namibia and South Africa will have their full share of peace, freedom, and justice." In addition, Bostwana has actively joined the other "frontline states" in opposing South Africa's support for the internal political parties in Namibia. The South Africans are miffed also at the mounting call for sanctions since the breadown in the Geneva conference on Namibia earlier this year. The petroleum shortage, in particular, may be Pretoria's warning that Bostwana, not South Africa, will be hurt first by sanctions. Botswana can simply not let its politics move too far from the reality of an overwhelming dependence of South Africa, though the pattern of this dependency has markedly shifted over the years. At independence in 1966, half of Botswana's recurrent budget and nearly all of the capital budget were met by foreign donors, principally Great Britain. The main exports, beef and animal products, were sold primarily to South Africa. Over two-thirds of Botswana's imports came from her southern neighbor. But with the discovery of major diamond reserves, the opening of the Selebi-Phikwe copper-nickel mine in 1973, and arrangements for preferential beef sales t the European community, export patterns dramatically changed. In 1979, minerals going to overseas buyers accounted for more than two-thirds of export earnings; exports to South Africa, still mainly beef and animal products, had fallen to less than one-tenth of total exports. Yet in other respects Botswana has become more dependent on South Africa since 1966. Now roughly 85 percent of the country's imports arrive from South Africa. Petroleum supplies, most luxury goods, and basic food staples for the growing industrial sector all come from South Africa or through South African ports. Currently, the Botswana government itself is investing over $50 million in a new diamond mine in southeastern Botswana at Jwaneng. The ready availability of essential capital goods for its development depends on access to South Africa. In addition, two major exports, beef and copper-nickel, require South African rail transport to reach their markets. In order to reduce its vulnerability, Botswana has used the growing mineral returns to help underwrite major capital programs aimed at diversifying its economy and protecting the mineral sector. There are now direct satellite telecommunications links with Europe; a through road has been built connecting Zambia and Botswana; and the government is negotiating the construction contract for an international airport capable of handling long-range jets. On the economic side, Botswana in 1976 established a domestic currency, the pula, tied to a "basket" of Western currencies, thereby breaking free from the South African rand. Also, a five-year arable land development program aiming at self-sufficiency in grain production by the mid-1980s has recently been initiated. Yes these are only small steps toward total independence from South Africa. Botswana officials generally stress that South Africa is unlikely ever to use its economic and military might against Botswana given the existing relatively moderate government, as compared to the avowedly leftist administrations of Angola and Mozambique. But, if international pressure mounts against South Africa and regional tensions increase, Botswana may soon find itself in an untenable balance between South African economic dominance and black African political pressure to join the continent's final liberation struggle.

Botswana protested to South Africa on March 19, 1981, over an alleged series of border incidents, including loudspeaker announcements from a helicopter saying South Africa would attack. A statement from the office of President Quett Masire said South African soldiers in camouflage uniforms traveled into the Chobi game park area in northwestern Botswana in two troop carriers, an armored car and a helicopter. The men allegedly used bullhorns to demand a meeting with a senior Botswana defense force officer and said the country would be attacked because "they" had killed a South African soldier. It was not immediately clear who "they" referred to in the alleged announcements. The statement issued here in Botswana's capital said South African troops fired on March 16, 1981, on Botswanan forces stationed near the border to prevent elephant poaching. The Botswana forces reportedly returned fire Tuesday after a similar incident. It said South Africa gave assurances that no attack on Botswana was planned and that the matters would be investigated. Botswana has protested to South Africa several times this year over alleged border incidents between South African troops and Angola-based guerrillas of South-West Africa (Namibia). Clashes have been reported along a portion of Namibia known as the Caprivi Strip, which separates Angola and Botswana. South Africa said that its jets raided a Namibian guerrilla base 190 miles into Angola the preceding day, and warned that countries harboring guerrillas should expect attacks. Pretoria administers Namibia, under a League of Nations mandate that was revoked by the United Nations in 1966. It has been fighting guerrillas seeking control of the former German colony for the past 15 years.

On April 14, 1982, the South African Defense Force says it is puzzled by allegations made by the second-in-command of the Botswana Defense Force, Brig Ian Khama, that South Africa was violating Botswana's air space and that South African agents had been responsible for border kidnappings. Brig Khama made the allegations in Salisbury over the weekend when he attended a soccer match between a Zimbabwean team and a team from Botswana. He said in an interview with the Zimbabwe 'Herald' that South African aggression against Botswana was apparently part of a conspiracy against independent black states in southern Africa. A South African Defense Force officer said the relationship with Botswana had been and still was a friendly one. He said that if Brig Khama had specific information about the incidents it would be greatly appreciated if he could provide the South African Defense Force with it so that the matter could be investigated. He said the Defense Force was not aware of any such incidents. Brig Khama said Botswana did not suffer from acts of sabotage from its own people because of the multi-party system in Botswana and because there was an opposition party. He said in the interview that there was a possibility that he might be entering politics.

The office of the President of Botswana, in a press release issued in Gaborone on June 7, 1983, categorically denied having any negotiations with South Africa on the alleged non-aggression pact. According to the South African paper the "Rand Daily Mail", South African foreign minister Pik Botha said he was involved in an "on-going process" of negotiation with Botswana and three other neighboring states (Lesotho, Swaziland, Mozambique) on the non-use of each other's territories as springboards for subversion. Botha said that satisfactory agreements in principle has been reached with Botswana on this matter and he was waiting to hear from Botswana how the agreement could be implemented in practice. In the press release, the office of the president of Botswana said that it wishes "to state quite categorically that it has no knowledge of the negotiations, let alone the agreement in principle, between Botswana and South Africa." `The government of Botswana has not engaged in any such negotiations with the government of South Africa," it said. "For its part, the government of Botswana does not see the need for such negotiations, for it is a long-standing policy of the government not to permit this country to be used for launching attacks against any of our neighbors," the release added. After confirming that Pik Botha had held a meeting in South Africa with the Botswana Minister of External Affairs A.M. Mogwe on April 21, 1983, to discuss issues of mutual interest, the release said, "these issues did not include the question of a non-aggression pact." It expressed deep regret over the fact that "the South Africa authorities have now chosen to use the occasion of the meeting to give a totally wrong impression regarding its purpose."

On May 14, 1984, the Botswanan President, Dr Quett Masire, told the American Senate Foreign Relations Committee that Botswana was under pressure from South Africa to sign an agreement similar to the Incomati accord. Dr Masire said he found such a proposal illogical and unreasonable in that, unlike Mozambique, there are no hostilities between Botswana and South Africa. The President said such an agreement will provide South Africa with a pretext to invade Botswana, thus endangering our hard-won independence. President Masire told the Foreign Relations Committee that Botswana had repeatedly told the international community and South Africa herself that she will not be used as a launching pad against her neighbors. Dr Masire said South Africa was now threatening to make conditions difficult at border posts between the two countries. South Africa had also threatened to deploy its powerful army along their common border. Nonetheless, the President says that Botswana will not sign any such treaty, regardless of the pressures. Dr Masire, however, expressed hope that the Incomati accord will bring peace to its parties. He said he hoped that the cease-fire between South Africa and Angola will lead to the implementation of resolution 435.The chairman of the Africa committee of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Mr Howard Wolpe, had earlier said that Botswana had a history of stability and political moderation. He said Botswana had been an influential member of the frontline states. Addressing himself to the economy, Mr Wolpe said that Botswana had sought prudent measures tailored to its specific needs and national growth. Mr Wolpe praised Botswana for what he described as a comprehensive and sophisticated food security scheme designed to avoid widespread malnutrition and starvation.

On June 10, 1984, the Botswanan President, Dr. Quett Masire, also briefed the delegates on South Africa's insistence that Botswana should sign a Incomati-type of non-aggression pact with that country. President Masire stressed that the seriousness of the situation was demonstrated by the fact that Botswana has held four meetings with South Africa on the issue. Dr Masire said that at each of these meetings Botswana explained that it was not necessary to sign such an agreement with a country with which there was no violent confrontation. He reiterated Botswana's policy towards South Africa, saying that while Botswana does not need to waive her condemnation of the unjust apartheid system, it will not sponsor acts of aggression against her neighbors. Dr Masire said that South Africa wants Botswana to leave her neutrality and to make South Africa's enemies her enemies.

On August 21, 1984, the Botswanan President, Dr Quett Masire, has asked the main opposition party in South Africa, the Progressive Federal Party, PFP, to help bring about improved relations between Botswana and the white-ruled Republic. The President made the appeal when talking to a 15-man strong delegation of the PFP. The delegation is in Botswana on an educational visit and returns to South Africa tomorrow. He told the leader of the delegation, Mr Peter Soul, that relations between Botswana and South Africa had deteriorated as a result of the insistence by the South African administration for Botswana to sign a pact along the lines of the Incomati accord. The President reiterated his Government's policy, which refused Botswana to be used as a springboard for attacks against any neighboring state. He said Botswana gives only token support to liberation movements, and that freedom fighters keep out of the country because they know the stand of his Government. Dr Masire stressed that Botswana is a small state and that it was in no position to cause problems. In an interview with BOPA [Botswana agency] Mr. Soul said his Government attached great significance to the meeting with the President. He said he would be reporting to his party's parliamentary caucus and to the party's foreign affairs spokesman, Mr. Colin Eglin. He also said that the President's message will be conveyed to the South African parliament. 

19900202-19940427 Transition 

The rivalry continued until the first changes regarding the apartheid regime in South Africa. The nature of the conflict was changed when South Africa underwent significant domestic changes in the early 1990s. The ANC as well as 59 other previously illegal organizations were legalized on February 2, 1990. Over the next several months, the South African government saw the institution of a new constitution and an end to apartheid. Without the racial issues that formed the basis for the ongoing conflict, the foundation of the rivalry ended.

On February 9, 1990, Botswana President Dr. Quett Masire said that Botswana will not consider diplomatic relations with South Africa until the apartheid system is removed. During an interview with South African Corporation's TV News in Gaborone, the Botswanan leader said that the time is not yet ripe for Botswana to open a diplomatic mission in South Africa. "It is our long standing policy of awaiting the emergence of a free and democratic South Africa before establishing diplomatic relations with Pretoria," he said. Although both Botswana and South Africa are members of the South African Customs Union, Gaborone still holds that South Africa is under an apartheid regime. On Pretoria's accusations that Botswana has been used as a launching pad for attacks on South Africa, president Masire said that Pretoria has never produced evidence to back its claims, adding that the root cause of the problems in South Africa is the apartheid system. President Masire however said he is glad that the South African government has at last come round to accept the fact that apartheid is the cause of its problems. Asked whether there is the need for the continued existence of the frontline group after Namibia's independence and the normalization of the situation in South Africa, Masire said: "I think it is premature to think of the dissolution of the frontline states grouping at this stage." Referring to South African president F.W. de Klerk's announcement, the Botswana leader said that the process of bringing about peace in South Africa has a bearing on Botswana because peace in that country would mean peace in the region. "De Klerk has taken a bold step and we urge him to complete the process without delay." President Masire also called for the immediate release of black nationalist leader Nelson Mandela and other political prisoners and lifting of the state of emergency in order to create a climate conducive to negotiating a peaceful end to apartheid.

The South African and Botswana governments have agreed to establish reciprocal missions, Foreign Affairs Minister Mr Pik Botha said on 30th December, 1991. In a statement released in Pretoria, Mr Botha said South Africa would establish an office in Gaborone while Botswana would base its mission in Pretoria. The two missions will be known as the Office of the South African Representative and the Office of the Botswana Representative, respectively.

Few economies are better positioned than Botswana's to capitalize on the much-anticipated post-Apartheid market of Southern Africa, it was reported on July 16, 1992. Decades of stable government and financial prudence in this country have produced one of the continent's most enviable balance sheets. Botswana earned more than $ 300 million last year from its investment portfolio alone. But rising urban unemployment may mark a weakness in the government's fiscal policy that some economists say could stunt the ability of Botswana's private sector to compete in an expanded regional market. Botswana lacks a substantial domestic manufacturing base. The country's membership in the South African Customs Union has largely undercut efforts to diversify the economy, according to diplomats here in the capital. Despite extensive government promotion of commercial and industrial development, including equity financing, subsidized rents, and loan and overdraft guarantees, private investors have shied away from Botswana's small domestic market and the country's high interest rates. Textile plants in the north produce jeans for Europe and the United States, but the economy remains dominated by diamond production. With an unemployment rate approaching 30 percent, investors here in Gaborone say that looser foreign-exchange controls and an increased focus on export manufacturing are needed to create jobs. "Export orientation is crucial to diversifying Botswana's economy," says one Western economist. "Considering the lack of sound investment opportunities, the government must restructure its incentive scheme to take advantage of opportunities in the South African market." When South Africa officially becomes a part of the regional economy, the high tariff barriers under which South African industry has prospered will fall, business leaders here hope. "It all depends on how the new South Africa deals with its own problems," said Baledzi Gaolathe, managing director of Debswana, Botswana's largest diamond producer that is owned by the government and DeBeers. Mr. Gaolathe, a former permanent secretary in the Ministry of Finance, predicts that when tariffs are reduced, Botswana's financial-services sector and the strength of its currency (based on reserves of more than $ 3.5 billion) will make the country a magnet for investment in southern Africa. No matter what happens in South Africa, Botswana may benefit. "It's a win-win situation for Botswana," according to a European diplomat. "If South Africa opens up its markets peacefully, business here will prosper. If change in South Africa is violent, investors looking for calm will make Botswana even more prosperous. "Some diplomats in Gaborone are concerned that majority rule in South Africa could result in the deportation of the 30,000 Botswanan miners employed there. But most observers discount that threat to the economy. "There may be lots of trouble in new South Africa, but it's still an economic powerhouse requiring regional economic cooperation," a senior US official says. The Southern African Development Coordination Conference, currently chaired by President Quett Masire of Botswana, will determine the future of economic relations in the region when the alliance lifts the last of its sanctions against South Africa. For Botswana to capitalize on its infrastructure, ethnic stability, and relatively corruption-free civil service, diplomats here say the nation must still address broad development issues. At independence 26 years ago, the country ranked among the world's 20 poorest. But mineral wealth has provided Botswana with education and health-care programs that make it 1 of 5 African nations judged by the United Nations to have improving living conditions. Emergency public works programs supplement incomes withered by the ongoing drought in the region. But average annual incomes of $ 3,000 are skewed by massive diamond profits and do not reflect the standard of living for many Botswanans who herd cattle along the edge of the Kalahari. An 8 percent annual urban growth rate has strained municipal services and inflated housing costs. Staple food prices are up more than 45 percent since the drought began, and inflation could reach 15 percent by the end of the year, according to Barclays Bank. While Botswana is a de jure multiparty democracy, the governing Botswana Democratic Party is firmly in control. Political observers here say the disorganized opposition could increase its three seats in Parliament to five or six in the next election. Unlike Zambia, where the bulk of the country's copper wealth was squandered by the former government, Botswana has been well served by conservative budgets that avoided showcase construction projects and unprofitable state-owned industries.

19940427-20159999 0.5 

On April 27, 1994, the first post-apartheid elections were held in South Africa. On May 11, 1994, Botswana's president, Sir Ketumile Masire, who left Gaborone to attend the inauguration of South Africa's president-elect, Mr. Nelson Mandela, in Pretoria, said that the government of Botswana intends to move swiftly to upgrade the diplomatic relations between Botswana and South Africa to full ambassadorial level. Botswana and South Africa's northern province have agreed to cooperate in the exchange of information and to bolster efforts to curb cross-border crime, a joint official statement made public on August 10, 1995, said. After three days of consultations in Gaborone, officials from both countries agreed to establish forums to facilitate the exchange of information at the ministerial, provincial commissioner, area commissioner and station commander levels. The first meeting of police commissioners is to be held within two months, the statement said. The two governments are to co-operate in the areas of vehicle theft, immigration matters, stray cattle, poaching and drug trafficking. Botswana, a relatively peaceful country which borders South Africa, has seen an upsurge in armed car hijacking in recent months. Most of the vehicles are taken across the border into South Africa. Members of the public are becoming more vocal about their dissatisfaction with the efficiency of the Botswana police in tracking criminals.

South Africa's minister of defense, Mr Joe Modise, says Botswana is one of the countries that bore the brunt of the liberation struggle that brought democracy to South Africa. He said this on August 17, 1995, during his meeting with the minister for presidential affairs and public administration, Mr Ponatshego Kedikilwe. Mr Modise is in Botswana at the invitation of Mr Kedikilwe. Mr Modise, the former commander of the ANC military wing, Umkhonto we Sizwe Spear of the Nation , said former frontline states have economic difficulties because of their role in assisting in the struggle against apartheid. He said Botswana could have made more economic progress had it not been for South Africa's liberation struggle. He said the region should remain in the front line against poverty and disease. For his part, Mr Kedikilwe commended Mr Modise for his personal role in the realization of democracy in South Africa. He said Mr Modise's visit reinforces the mutual cooperation and understanding between Botswana and South Africa. He said the spirit must filter down to various activities, including sport. Mr Kedikilwe expressed happiness that Botswana, South Africa and Zimbabwe have demonstrated that African countries can solve a crisis, as the three did when trouble started in Lesotho. The minister for foreign affairs, Lt-Gen Mompati Merafhe, says the years of conflict, armed raids and threats are over, and now South Africa is Botswana's close friend. He was welcoming his South African counterpart, Mr Alfred Nzo, today. Mr Nzo is in Botswana on a three-day visit at the invitation of Gen Merafhe. Gen Merafhe said Botswana's establishment of full diplomatic relations with South Africa shows the seriousness with which it regards its neighbor. He said the Southern African Customs Union is to undergo radical improvement, thanks to the new spirit of genuine partnership and cooperation in the region. For his part, Mr Nzo said Botswana should be proud that no Motswana has ever gone into exile due to political reasons, in a region that has experienced so much instability. He further said Botswana is playing a very important role in SADC Southern African Development Community. Mr Nzo also met with the speaker of the National Assembly, Mr Moutlakgola Nwako. He told Mr Nwako that the transition period in South Africa is not that smooth, as there are problems with some provinces, which feel that they can take President Mandela to court. Mr Nwako said developments in South Africa will have an impact on Botswana.

South Africa and Botswana will establish a Joint Permanent Commission of Co-operation to boost bilateral relations between the neighboring states in several sectors, the two governments said on September 7, 1995. In a communique at the end of a three-day state visit by South African President Nelson Mandela, the two governments also agreed to pursue consultations on the setting up of a Joint Permanent Commission on Defense and Security to combat cross-border crime. It noted that an "increasing number of criminal activities in the region posed a serious threat to the efforts of the two countries to improve the welfare of their peoples". Specific criminal actions include drug trafficking, vehicle theft and wildlife poaching. Mandela, who received a gift of 10 cattle from his host, President Quett Ketumile Masire of Botswana, told a press conference that South Africa would consider all neighboring countries as equal partners in regional development. This, he said, would extend to fresh negotiations on the Southern African Customs Union, which in the past has favored South Africa. Asked if there would ever be a volkstaat, or homeland, for white Afrikaans-speaking South Africans, Mandela said he had retreated from his campaign statements ahead of last year's parliamentary elections, when he stated there would be no Afrikaner volkstaat, to allow for more room to negotiate with conservative whites. He said there needed to be much more deliberation, including an acceptable definition of an Afrikaner, which he said was "highly contested". Mandela laid wreaths at the graves of victims of a cross-border raid on June 14, 1985, against African National Congress (ANC) activists by South African Defense Force commandos. He also put a wreath on the graves of 15 Botswana Defense Force soldiers who died in a 1978 Lesoma ambush by then Rhodesian forces. He travelled to the central town of Serowe, where he laid a wreath at the grave of Botswana's first president, Sir Seretse Khama, who provoked strong opposition from the British and white South African officials of the time by marrying a white British woman.Mandela also met briefly with the leader of Botswana's opposition, Kenneth Koma, and local business leaders.

On April 29, 1996, South Africa's President, Nelson Mandela, thanked Botswana for its support for democracy and for its inspiration for black Africa, by promoting multiparty democracy across the continent and especially in South Africa.

Botswana's democracy served as a "guiding star" as South Africa took its first faltering steps towards its new democracy, former South African president Nelson Mandela said on October 14, 1999. "The manner in which the people of Botswana have combined the modern forms of democracy with the long held traditions of indigenous democracy is an example that can be looked to in the current rebirth of our continent," Mandela said. Speaking while receiving an honorary Doctorate of Laws from the University of Botswana at the National Stadium in Gaborone, Mandela said Botswana occupied a special place in the hearts of South Africans. Botswana was viewed as an elder brother to South Africa, he said. The award was conferred on Mandela by Botswana President Festus Mogae, chancellor of the university. "Botswana's democracy served as a guiding star to us as we falteringly took our first steps towards our new democracy," Mandela said. "It was with pride that we could point to the example of our neighbor as an example of African democracy that had sustained itself over time." The economic recovery that the region was now observing was long foreshadowed by the economic progress and stability of Botswana. "That the seat of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) is here in Botswana is no meaningless coincidence. It signifies our recognition of the historical role played by Botswana in our development and the example it provided," Mandela said.

On July 1, 2000, Botswana and South Africa signed a joint defense and security agreement to help curb drug trafficking, cross border crime and illegal immigrants. The joint defense and security commission to be established under the agreement will also ensure cooperation and consultation on customs, immigration and security issues. The acting minister for presidential affairs, Tebelelo Seretse signed for Botswana, while defense minister Mosiuoa Lekota signed for South Africa at the ceremony which was attended by top security and military commanders from both countries. Lekota said at the ceremony that the agreement prepares the two countries for peacemaking and peacekeeping operations in parts of Africa where former colonial masters still encourage tension. He added that South Africa is looking forward to a joint training session and acquisition of equipment with Botswana, adding that the agreement presents the two countries with an opportunity to influence events in Southern Africa. Lekota asserted that the agreement marked a time to reciprocate the generosity shown to South African freedom fighters by Botswana during the apartheid era. Apartheid ruled South Africa used to launch military attacks against Botswana and other so-called frontline states that freedom fighters used as bases. The agreement comes weeks after the two countries inaugurated the first cross border Game Park in Africa, the Trans-Kgalagadi Frontier Park which is now managed jointly as a single unit by South Africa and Botswana. Another notable joint venture between the two countries occurred in 1998 when they militarily intervened in Lesotho and successfully helped put down a mutiny and restore law and order.

Five months after its formation, the Botswana-South Africa joint permanent Commission on Defense and Security began its first meeting in Gaborone, on November 20, 2000. A statement from the Botswana Presidency said the Commission would be a vehicle for strengthening mutual co-operation between the two countries in the fields of defense and security. It is also expected to achieve and maintain lasting peace and security within the two countries and along their common borders. The Commission seeks to ensure a joint approach by the two countries in combating drug trafficking and gun-running. Reports say Botswana is joining South Africa as an attractive transit point or destination for narcotic drugs. Apprehension is also rife that Botswana could become a transit point for arms to reinforce Angola's UNITA rebels. While the Botswana delegation is led by the Minister for Presidential Affairs and Public Administration, the South African team to the two-day meeting is headed by Defense Minister M.G.P Lekota. The meeting comes after the two neighbors signed an agreement in June to establish the Commission.

Botswana and South Africa have issued a joint communique on the results of a state visit to Botswana by South African President Thabo Mbeki on 11-13 March, 2003. The communique says the two heads of state reviewed bilateral, regional and international issues of mutual interest such as the Agreement on the Establishment of a Joint Permanent Commission for Cooperation between Botswana and South Africa. The two leaders also expressed the need "to assist the people of Zimbabwe in addressing the problems confronting their country".

While Botswana basked under the illusion that an independent South Africa would be an equal trading partner, the reverse has been the case. In fact, post-apartheid South Africa is a monster that threatens to reverse Botswana's economic gains. The just released BOCCIM report on August 3, 2005, on a growth and employment strategy for Botswana says the democratization of South Africa has proved to be a double-edged sword for Botswana. "Democratization has significantly improved South Africa's political standing, its ability to penetrate international markets, to attract foreign investment, tourists and traffic flows," says the report. It argues that the democratization process has also led to significant improvement in South Africa's economic and financial structure as well as its political standing in the world. Some of the gains may have been detrimental to Botswana, especially those based on democracy. This is because for long Botswana has enjoyed the sole reputation of Africa's only functioning democracy and centre of good governance and sound economic management. The other negative impact is the shift in world focus to South Africa which means the world will view Botswana "not only through a critical lens and finding flaws in its democratic practice, but also more critical gaze extends to what is indeed an unbalanced economy. This may not be entirely fair but it's nonetheless a reality to be accepted," the report emphasizes. The report says that South Africa is a serious threat to Botswana. It has started attracting meaningful foreign direct investment flows and developed a sizeable, broad-based tourism industry. It has significantly increased the sophistication of its banking and financial services sector. The result has been to render South Africa a magnet for Africa and Botswana's expensively educated entrepreneurs. The BOCCIM report says Botswana's failure to respond positively to developments taking place in South Africa has led to a slump in local business confidence. This has in turn led to the diminishing of the positive vibe in the streets of Gaborone in an almost inverse proportion to the increase experienced by South Africa. "At this time, Johannesburg and other major cities positively 'hum', retail and sales are booming, real estate prices have risen almost exponentially, residential, commercial and tourist infrastructure-related developments are booming." On the positive side, the report suggests that the South African factor can be turned into an opportunity by Botswana. But new policies must be adopted which differentiate Botswana and give it advantages in FDI flows, local business operations and dealing with Africa. One of the major proposals the report makes is that Botswana needs a well sequenced change in direction over a broad front of its core economic policies and regulations to attract FDI and domestic investment growth.

Botswana's president appealed to South Africa on October 26, 2005, to send its raw diamonds to be sorted in his country as a step toward giving Africans a greater role in the industry. Only a small proportion of the diamonds mined in South Africa, Botswana or elsewhere in Africa are processed on the continent, meaning the skilled jobs and much of the earnings are elsewhere. South Africa's ruling party has vowed to change that, with legislation targeting the hold on the industry exercised by De Beers, whose Diamond Trading Corporation dominates global trade. The legislation now before the South African parliament, where Botswana's President Festus Mogae made his proposal Wednesday, has set off alarm bells throughout the industry. Botswana is the world's biggest diamond producer in value terms and has a stake in De Beers. South Africa is the fourth world's biggest diamond producer. Most diamonds are now sorted in London via the Diamond Trading Corporation and then cut and polished in India, where costs are lowest. De Beers has proposed moving its sorting operations to Gaborone, capital of Botswana, partly in response to calls to do more to foster development in Africa. The proposed South African legislation would set up a South African State Diamond Trader and tax exports of raw diamonds to foster the domestic cutting, polishing and jewelry industry. In a speech to the South African parliament, Mogae said that under Botswana's proposal, "it would still be possible ... to facilitate the supply of rough diamonds for the cutting and polishing enterprises inside South Africa." Mogae is currently on a state visit to South Africa to cement already strong ties between the neighboring countries.

South Africa and Botswana will sign an agreement next week allowing Pretoria to buy electricity from a giant power station being built in its northern neighbor, an official said on November 8, 2006. South Africa's state-run electricity supplier Eskom and the Botswana Power Corporation (BPC) will ink the pact on Monday in the capital Gaborone, BPC public relations officer Tlhomamiso Selato said. Under the agreement, Eskom will source electricity from the five-billion-dollar Mmamabula power station being built in eastern Botswana and due to be up and running in 2008, he said. The coal-fired power station will export most of its electricity to help alleviate an anticipated shortfall in southern Africa by 2009 due to burgeoning demand. Eskom has said it will have to boost generation by 2,000 megawatts every year for the next two decades to meet surging demand in Africa's largest economy. It has said it is keen to import Mmambula's entire output of 3,600 megawatts. Late last year, the 14-nation Southern African Development Community regional bloc warned that the current electricity generation surplus would run out after 2007 if no fresh investments were made in the sector. The head of a SADC committee of power utilities had said a regional investment plan over the next 20 years would require some eight billion dollars (6.6 billion euros).

PS-SOURCES: New York Times December April 19, 1970; August 25, 1970; Christian Science Monitor June 10, 1981; June 22, 1988; July 16, 1992; Associated Press March 19, 1981; October 26, 2005; BBC October 20, 1979; April 15, 1982; May 14, 1984; June 13, 1984; August 21, 1984; October 30, 1989; August 19, 1995; March 14, 2003; Xinhua November 25; 1977; June 7, 1983; June 22, 1988; December 28, 1988; Globe and Mail October 10, 1989; February 9, 1990; Africa News April 29, 1996; October 14, 1999; July 1, 2000; November 20, 2000; August 3, 2005; Deutsche Presse-Agentur August 10, 1995; September 7, 1995; Agence France Presse November 8, 2006

MARITIME-MIDS:

MARITIME-DISPUTE:

Discussion:

SOURCES: Gibler, D.M. 2018. Militarized Interstate Dispute Narratives, 1816-2010. Langham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. 
