FILE: cm630670v11.0.txt
DYAD: IRAN-SAUDI ARABIA
RIVALRY: RIV1191
DISPUTE(S): MID3048 MID3617 MID2553 MID3625 MID2574 MID2587 MID2798 

RIVNOTES: 

PS: 19270520-19790331 0.5 19790401-19840425 0.25 19840426-19880819 0.00 19880820-19910116 -9 19910117-20091103 0.5 20091104-20110605 0.25 20110606-20209999 0.00

PS-UPDATE2020: The lesser rivarly between these two states that began with supporting competing sides in the Yemeni civil war transforms into a serious and therefore more expansive rivalry as the two states become each other's primary rivalry for influence in the Middle East. Although there are not direct and overt military confrontations (much like the US-USSR Cold War), the number of proxy wars between them expand to include the Syrian civil war, an expanded Yemeni civil war, and various disputes involving Lebanon, Bahrein, Iraq, and other places. The two states represent different sides of the Shiite-Sunni split. Alliances, weapons purchases, defense strategies, and other policy decisions reflect the status of this rivalry as a central core of each's foreign policy. We date the shift to serious rivalry to 20110606, which is the onset of the Syrian civil war according to COW - 2011 also involved disputes over Bahrein in which the Saudis sent troops to quell a Shiite uprising purportedly sponsored by Iran.
 

PSNOTES: Renewed rivalry with Saudi Arabia and Iran in proxy war in Yemen starting in 2009 and then in Syria civil war thereafter. Saudi Arabia has worked to keep sanctions on Iran for nuclear activities. The rivalry is largely a Sunni-Shiite split and is a competition for regional influence in several parts of the Middle East.

PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20220608
PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20220608

Territorial-Maritime-Boundary Issues Variables

MID3617

TERRMID: MID3617 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID3617 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID3617 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID3617 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID3617 from Gibler 2018, in 1984 Iran attacked two Saudi oil tankers in the Persian Gulf that it suspected of carrying oil from Iraq. Iran routinely attacked tankers carrying Iraqi oil during the Iran-Iraq War as a means of harming Iraq's economy. Coded third party link to territorial MID because this was connected to the Iran-Iraq War, a territorial dispute. 

MARITMID: MID3617 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID3617 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID3617 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID3617 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID3617 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID3617 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID3617 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID3617 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID3617 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID3617 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID3617 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID3617 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID3048

TERRMID: MID3048 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID3048 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID3048 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID3048 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID3048 from Gibler 2018, in 1984 Iran again bombed Saudi oil tankers trading with Iraq. Iran routinely attacked tankers carrying Iraqi oil during the Iran-Iraq War as a means of harming Iraq's economy. Coded third party link to territorial MID because this was connected to the Iran-Iraq War, a territorial dispute. 

MARITMID: MID3048 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID3048 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID3048 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID3048 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID3048 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID3048 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID3048 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID3048 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID3048 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID3048 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID3048 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID3048 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID2553

TERRMID: MID2553 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID2553 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID2553 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID2553 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID2553 from Gibler 2018, in 1985 Iran again bombed Saudi oil tankers trading with Iraq. Iran routinely attacked tankers carrying Iraqi oil during the Iran-Iraq War as a means of harming Iraq's economy. Coded third party link to territorial MID because this was connected to the Iran-Iraq War, a territorial dispute. 

MARITMID: MID2553 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID2553 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID2553 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID2553 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID2553 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID2553 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID2553 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID2553 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID2553 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID2553 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID2553 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID2553 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID3625

TERRMID: MID3625 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID3625 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID3625 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID3625 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID3625 from Gibler 2018, Iran became angry at several Arab states for siding with or supporting Iraq during the Iran-Iraq War. In 1986, Iran issued a threat to Saudi Arabia and Kuwait and deployed troops to the Kuwaiti border. Saudi Arabia warned that an attack on Kuwait would result in a defensive attack from Saudi Arabia. Coded third party link to territorial MID because this was connected to the Iran-Iraq War, a territorial MID. 

MARITMID: MID3625 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID3625 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID3625 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID3625 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID3625 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID3625 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID3625 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID3625 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID3625 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID3625 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID3625 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID3625 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID2574

TERRMID: MID2574 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID2574 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID2574 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID2574 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID2574 from Gibler 2018, in 1986 Iran again bombed Saudi oil tankers trading with Iraq. Iran routinely attacked tankers carrying Iraqi oil during the Iran-Iraq War as a means of harming Iraq's economy. Coded third party link to territorial MID because this was connected to the Iran-Iraq War, a territorial dispute. 

MARITMID: MID2574 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID2574 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID2574 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID2574 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID2574 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID2574 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID2574 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID2574 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID2574 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID2574 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID2574 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID2574 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID2587

TERRMID: MID2587 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID2587 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID2587 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID2587 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID2587 from Gibler 2018, in 1986 Iran issued a threat to the Persian Gulf states that it would block the Strait of Hormuz, an important strait for oil transport. Iran was attempting to block ships from trading with Iraq in an attempt to harm Iraq's economy during the Iran-Iraq war. Coded third party link to terriorial MID because this was connected to the Iran-Iraq War, a territorial dispute. 

MARITMID: MID2587 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID2587 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID2587 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID2587 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID2587 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID2587 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID2587 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID2587 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID2587 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID2587 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID2587 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID2587 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID2798

TERRMID: MID2798 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID2798 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID2798 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID2798 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID2798 from Gibler 2018, in 1987 Iran again bombed Saudi oil tankers trading with Iraq. Iran routinely attacked tankers carrying Iraqi oil during the Iran-Iraq War as a means of harming Iraq's economy. Coded third party link to territorial MID because this was connected to the Iran-Iraq War, a territorial dispute. 

MARITMID: MID2798 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID2798 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID2798 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID2798 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID2798 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID2798 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID2798 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID2798 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID2798 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID2798 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID2798 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID2798 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

NARRATIVE-CM:
The United States provided military assistance (15 F-15 fighter planes) to Saudi Arabia on January 10, 1979. Secretary of Defense Harold Brown of the US expressed support for Saudi Arabia on February 10, 1979. Saudi Arabian military aircraft shot down two Iranian military aircraft over the Persian Gulf on June 5, 1984. US AWACS (surveillance) and KC-10 (fuel tanker) military aircraft assisted the Saudi military aircraft. Diplomatic relations between Iran and Saudi Arabia were strained following riots in Mecca on July 31, 1987, resulting in the deaths of some 402 individuals. Saudi Arabia blamed the riots on Iranian pilgrims who had marched on the Great Mosque chanting anti-Saudi Arabian slogans. Iran called for the overthrow of the Saudi Arabian government on August 1, 1987, and Saudi Arabia called for the overthrow of the Iranian government on August 25, 1987. Saudi Arabia severed diplomatic relations with Iran in March 1988.

SOURCES-CM: 
Brecher and Wilkenfeld, 1997, 656-658; Brogan, 1992, 353-357; Jessup, 1998, 649-653; *Middle East Journal *(MEJ), Spring 1979.

NARRATIVE-CR: 
Five of the seven MIDs occurring between Saudi Arabia and Iran from 1984 until 1988 took place in the context of the Iran-Iraq War. During this war, Saudi Arabia was one of the chief financial backers of Iraq. In efforts to cut off this support, Iran employed a number of tactics directed at Saudi interests. These included direct military overtures, bombing of Saudi shipping, threats to bomb Saudi shipping, bombing tankers carrying Saudi oil, and cutting off access to the Persian Gulf. 

MID3048 occurred form April until July of 1984. On June 5 of 1984, the Saudis and Iranians engaged in an aerial battle in which Iranian planes were downed. The Iranian jets entered Saudi air space and the superior Saudi air force shot them down. This MID takes place during the Iran-Iraq War. Saudi Arabia was one of the prime financial backers of Iraq during this war. 

MID3617 occurred from May of 1984 until July. This is a multilateral mid involving Qatar, Bahrain, the UAE, Oman, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia vs. Iran. Here the issue is the war between Iran and Iraq. Iraq is receiving support from Saudi Arabia and Kuwait in its war against Iran. Iran wants to limit that support. They do so by bombing Saudi and Kuwaiti tankers in the Persian Gulf and making it clear that they are doing so in response to the Saudi support of the Iraqis. They widen the bombing to include tankers of all the gulf states. On 5/17/1984 Iranian war planes bombed a Saudi oil tanker in the Persian Gulf. This was the fifth such attack in a three week period. On May 21, 1984 an Iranian newspaper suggested that Iran's air force bomb power stations in Kuwait and Saudi Arabia to force them to stop supporting Iraq in its war with Iran. Iraq is also bombing Iranian tankers or tankers flagged with other countries that attempt to take on oil at Iranian ports. 

MID3625 occurred from November of 1985 until March of 1986. This was a multilateral mid involving Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, the US, and the UK vs. Iran. At this point in the Iran-Iraq War, Iran gained a foothold in Iraq and was able to repel counter offensives successfully. Emboldened by this success, Iran renewed threats to other Gulf states that were supporting Iraq in the war. It specifically threatened Saudi Arabia and Kuwait as the prime financial backers of Iraq in the war. The United States and the UK both committed support for their allies, the Saudis and Kuwaitis, should they be attacked by Iran. 

MID2553 occurred on February 21, 1985. An Iranian plane tried to bomb a Saudi Arabian tanker in the Gulf, but the explosive missed the target. 

MID2574 is a bilateral mid occurring from 4/6/1986 until 5/1/1986. Here the Iranian air force attacked a Saudi oil tanker in the Persian Gulf, setting the tanker on fire, and wounding several sailors operating the ship. It was reported that this attack was again a response to Saudi support for Iraq in the Iran-Iraq War. 

MID2587 is a multilateral mid involving Bahrain, the UAE, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and Kuwait vs. Iran. This is a one day mid taking place on 8/29/1986. Here again the motivation for this mid is the squeeze Iran was trying to put on other gulf states in an effort to bleed Iraq dry of cash. Here Iran threatened to close the Gulf of Hormuz that would effectively cut off access to the Persian Gulf and cripple the oil exporting capacity of the Gulf States. 

MID2798 occurred from August of 1987 until April of 1988. Diplomatic relations between Iran and Saudi Arabia were strained following riots in Mecca on July 31, 1987, resulting in the deaths of some 402 individuals. Saudi Arabia blamed the riots on Iranian pilgrims who had marched on the Great Mosque chanting anti-Saudi Arabian slogans. Iran called for the overthrow of the Saudi Arabian government on August 1, 1987, and Saudi Arabia called for the overthrow of the Iranian government on August 25, 1987. Saudi Arabia severed diplomatic relations with Iran in March 1988. The crisis abated with all of the Arab states, except Libya supporting the Saudis. This mid does not hang together with the previous mids and does not seem to be motivated by the same concerns. However, it could be that the dispute had an underlying cause of the Saudi support for Iraq and a general animosity deriving from that in the Iranian population. There is no reference material available that speculates what the pilgrims or security forces motives were. 

The Iran-Iraq War ended on August 20, 1988, with a UN proposed cease-fire. This marked the end of formal support by Saudi Arabia to the Iraqis. This in turn ended the motivation for the Iranians to militarily harass the Saudis and the Kuwaitis. 

Saudi-Iranian ties began to improve after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and its subsequent 1991 Persian Gulf war. Iran took sides with the Kuwaitis and the anti-Iraqi coalition of the Arab Persian Gulf states. This improved Iran's relations with Saudi Arabia and all of its southern Arab neighbors. In particular, Saudi-Iranian relations, especially their diplomatic ones, began to improve. In the 1990s, the two states exchanged high-ranking delegates, even though various remaining grievances on both sides prevented their rapid expansion. 

The 1997 election of Mohammad Khatami as Iranian president was a catalyst for improvement in Iranian-Saudi relations. He pursued a foreign policy aimed at tension reduction and improving ties with foreign countries. This paved the way for a rapid expansion of ties between Iran and its southern Arab neighbors. In particular, that policy put Iranian-Saudi relations on a stable and friendly path. Their bilateral relations encompassing various fields, such as political, economic, educational and security have since grown on a steady basis. They have also coordinated policies within the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries over issues such as oil pricing and production quotas for the member states reflect their cooperative relations. Additionally, Iran Air resumed regular service to Saudi Arabia in 1997. 

In 1998, the two states cooperated over a long-standing issue between the two, pilgrimage to Mecca during the Hajj. On numerous occasions in the past Iranian Shi'ites demonstrated Sunni Saudi officials. In 1998, many of these issues were dealt with cooperatively. Though there were still problems, the two states are working together in efforts to resolve this issue. 

The two states have also cooperated on security affairs since 1997. As the largest and the richest Persian Gulf countries with certain influence, Iran and Saudi Arabia have the capabilities to affect the pace of events in their region. Iran and Saudi Arabia have signed a few security agreements since 1997, including one in April 2002 during the official visit to Iran of Saudi Minister of the Interior Amir Nayef bin Abdulaziz. Not much official information is available regarding these agreements, but it is thought that they include cooperation towards the elimination of extremist and terrorist organizations. The Saudi Foreign Ministry did release information on Iran's handing over of suspected al-Qadea members to the Saudi authorities.

SOURCES-CR: 
Asia Times, 8/16/2002; Associated Press, 5/21/1984; Brecher and Wilkenfeld, 1997, 656-658; Brogan, 1992, 353-357; Jessup, 1998, 649-653; *Middle East Journal *(MEJ), Spring 1979; New York Times, 5/17/1984; 6/7/1984, 3/14/1986, 4/6/1986

PS-NARRATIVE: 

19460302-19790331 0.5

Saudi Arabia joined the system of states on May 20, 1927. This is the date when the independence of Saudi Arabia was officially recognized by the international community. Saudi Arabia and Iran established diplomatic relations in 1928. British and Soviet troops started to withdraw from Iran after having occupied it during WWII, on March 2, 1946. Iran gained its ability to conduct independent foreign policy in the aftermath of this withdrawal.

On March 12, 1957, the Shah of Iran, Pahlavi, went to Saudi Arabia on an official visit to meet with King Saud. Pahlavi was trying to convince King Saud to form an anti-communist coalition in the Middle East. Both countries were strong U.S. allies in the region. On March 11, 1958, Iran repudiated the oil agreement between Saudi Arabia and the British-occupied Bahrain. Iran still considers Bahrain as part of its territory. Iran said that all profits from the agreement were Iran's right and that Iran deserved the right to declare such transactions null and void. On November 12, 1968, King Faisal of Saudi Arabia and Iranian Shah Pahlavi met in Jeddah to discuss how to deal with the Gulf new independent sheikdoms to avoid revolutionary governments taking them over. Even though they have disagreed in the past over the fate of Bahrain the two countries decided to work together in the future. 

In 1966 King Faisal of Saudi Arabia visited Iran with the aim of strengthening the relationships between the countries. The Shah of Iran reciprocated by paying an official visit to Saudi Arabia which eventually led to a peaceful resolution of the islands of Farsi and Arabi. It was agreed between Iran and Saudi Arabia that the island of Farsi will be possessed by Iran and the island of Arabi will be under the control of Saudi Arabia. During the 1970s, Saudi Arabia's main concerns over Iran were first, Iran's modernisation of its military and its military dominance all over the region and than Iran's take-over of the islands of Big Tunb, Little Tunb and Abu Moussa in 1971 which challenged the United Arab Emirates claim over these islands. The relationship between Iran and Saudi Arabia was at its height between the years 1968 and 1979. 

19790401-19840425 0.25

After the Iranian Revolution in 1979, Khomeini and other Iranian leaders openly attacked and criticized the character and religious legitimacy of the Saudi regime. The change of regime in Iran, starting with April 1, 1979, when the people of Iran voted in a referendum to become an Islamic Republic, signaled the start of a transition period. Iran's new leadership criticized the character and religious legitimacy of the Saudi regime, challenged its position in OPEC and went for open confrontation in Bahrain and other Gulf sheikdoms, as well as indirectly through the Iran-Iraq war during which Saudi Arabia supported Iraq. 

On February 9, 1980, Mohammad Javad Rabbani, Ambassador of the Iranian Islamic Republic in Jiddah, has said [in a conversation with a Pars correspondent] that Iran has friendly relations with the Persian Gulf countries. Moreover, those countries had made joint efforts with us at Islamic conferences and regional meetings. On Iranian-Saudi relations, Mohammad Javad Rabbani said: Our relations with the Saudi brothers are friendly relations. They themselves have respect and appreciation for the Iranian Islamic Revolution and its leader, Imam Khomeyni. They also have strong friendly feelings towards the Iranians. The Iranian Islamic Republic's Ambassador in Jeddah added: Since, from the religious aspect, Saudi Arabia has been the focus of interest of all Muslims in the world, particularly Iranians, we have great respect for them. Saudi officials are making efforts to overcome the difficulties faced by the Iranian pilgrims and are giving them all the help they need. Mr Rabbani said: Saudi Arabia is a base for solving and ending many problems connected with Islam. Islamic conferences are held in Jeddah and the task of the Islamic league, which was founded in Holy Mecca, is to debate problems faced by brother Muslims anywhere in the world. The presence of the Iranian embassy in Jeddah is not limited to the diplomatic aspect only, but also extends to the Islamic aspect and the embassy's cultural activity. On economic relations between Iran and Saudi Arabia, Mr Rabbani said: Despite the fact that we do not have important economic relations with Saudi Arabia and that oil decisions are made at OPEC meetings, the two countries can undertake production projects by investing joint capital. Iran can sell a lot of its commodities in Saudi Arabia and can contribute to the implementation of many economic projects there. "The Ambassador of the Islamic Republic of Iran suggested that matters concerning the Haj and pilgrimage be separated from the Waqfs organization and be handled by a completely independent body and that the Red Lion and Sun should build a permanent hospital in Saudi Arabia so that in addition to economizing on expenses it could be of some help to the people of Saudi Arabia and other countries. The Iranian Ambassador concluded by calling for increased familiarization of the world population with the Islamic Revolution of Iran."

Security forces dispersed a group of Iranian pilgrims in Mecca on September 25, 1982, seizing portraits of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini and revolutionary leaflets, the Interior Ministry said. Iran's state-run Teheran radio called it a ''savage raid.'' Iranian press reports said the Saudi police tear-gassed and clubbed the pilgrims, wounding 30 and arresting more than 100, including a personal aide to Ayatollah Khomeini, a parliamentary deputy and a member of Iran's Council of Guardians. The officials were later released but the others were detained, Iran said. The Saudi Interior Ministry spokesman denied the Iranian accounts. He did not say how many Iranians were involved or whether there were any arrests or injuries. He also declined to say what the leaflets said. He said the Iranians, carrying portraits of their spiritual leader and shouting slogans, converged in and around a building where other Iranians had erected loudspeakers for speeches. The spokesman said the police ''dispersed the gathering, confiscated portraits, leaflets and microphones, and evicted all Iranians inside the building.'' The Iranians were in Mecca for the annual Hajj, the three-day religious festival. About two million Moslems are expected to attend. The Interior Minister Prince Nayef of Saudi Arabia warned earlier that any Iranian or other pilgrims making trouble in the holy city during the holiday would be deported. ''Our policy is to facilitate the right of pilgrimage to all Moslems, but certainly anyone who tries to undermine security will be returned from where he came,'' Prince Nayef said. Mecca was the site of a siege by Moslem fanatics three years ago. The violence at a holy shrine led to the public beheading of more than 60 participants. At least 21 Iranians have been deported as a result of activities last week at Medina, the most sacred city in Saudi Arabia after Mecca. This incident was the first in Mecca during this holiday season. As in the Medina incidents, the Iranians started rallying just before the major weekly prayers, in an apparent effort to attract other pilgrims, the Saudi spokesman said.

On November 25, 1982, conservative Saudi Arabia and revolutionary Iran were locked in a struggle for control over the oil-wealthy sheikdoms strung out along the Arab side of the Persian Gulf. The outcome could well determine which country emerges as the dominant power in the gulf as well as the survival of the Saudi monarchy. The conflict has become entwined in the 26-month-old war between Iran and Iraq, with the Saudis depending on the Iraqis to hold the Iranians at bay while they seek to incorporate the vulnerable sheikdoms into a Saudi-dominated and U.S.-supported collective security arrangement. The Iranians are using the carrot and stick to woo the sheikdoms away from the Saudi orbit and get them to halt their sizable aid, primarily billions of dollars in loans, to the Iraqi side. There are signs the Iranians are having some success, to the consternation of the Iraqis and Saudis. Underlying the struggle for dominance over the world's oil heartland, where 56 percent of all known reserves are located, is the dynamism of Iran's Islamic revolution, whose Shiite apostles say they seek to bring down the socialist Baath government of Saddam Hussein in Iraq on the one hand and overthrow the Saudi monarchy on the other. The conflict between these two fundamentalist Islamic states-Saudi Arabia a close ally of the United States and Iran its bitter enemy-seems to be worsening, and, along with the Iranian-Iraqi war, it is totally consuming the politics of the gulf. Last December, the authorities here arrested 73 Iranian-trained dissidents who were intent on overthrowing the ruling Al Khalifa family and establishing a Khomeini-style revolutionary Islamic state. Western diplomatic and Bahraini sources say Iran's Revolutionary Guards are still training gulf revolutionaries in two camps where the 73 were indoctrinated and that there is another one operating in Syria. The Iranians are recruiting mainly among the Shiite communities in the Arab Gulf States. Shiite Moslems make up at least 60 percent of Bahrain's 350,000 people and constitute small, but politically active minorities in several other Gulf states, including Kuwait and Saudi Arabia. Since last December's unsuccessful coup, Bahrain is reliably reported to have expelled by boat 200 to 300 suspected Shiite dissidents while Kuwait has thrown out 20,000 foreigners, mostly Shiites, thus providing the Iranians with plenty of potential recruits for their training camps. The Iranian challenge to Saudi religious and political leadership was most recently laid down in late September during the annual pilgrimage to Mecca, when thousands of Iranian Shiite zealots staged demonstrations in favor of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini and tried to proselytize among the 2 million Moslem pilgrims in attendance. After a series of violent clashes, the Saudi authorities finally expelled 100 Iranians including their leader, Hojatoleslam Mousavi Khoiniha. The Iranians had already made clear their revolutionary intentions in early June by sending their deputy foreign minister, Hossein Sheikholeslam, to Abu Dhabi to tell its ruler, Sheik Zayid Sultan Nuhayan, that their main target after the war with Iraq ends is Saudi Arabia. This message was relayed to David Steel, leader of the British Liberal Party, who was then also visiting Abu Dhabi, according to a member of his delegation. The "cold war" between Saudi Arabia and Iran is not just a matter of words, either. The two are at loggerheads inside the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, with Iran flouting its production quota and selling its oil as low at $29 a barrel, undercutting the Saudi benchmark price by $5. As a result of its price war, Iran has been able to push up its production to 2 million barrels a day, despite the soft world market, while that of Saudi Arabia has tumbled to 5.5 million barrels, a cutback of nearly one-half in less than two years. The mounting pressures and counterpressures were very much in evidence at a summit here of the six members of the Arab Gulf Cooperation Council earlier this month. The council was created just 18 months ago, partly in response to the threat from Iran's Islamic revolution and the Iranian-Iraqi war and partly as a result of long-standing efforts by Kuwait and Saudi Arabia to bring the vulnerable Arab monarchies closer together. The grouping comprises Oman, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar and Bahrain in addition to Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, and deliberately excludes Iraq on the ground that it has a socialist economic and republican political order. The six constitute only a fraction of the Arab world's total population-10 million to 11 million of its roughly 140 million people. But they produce currently 7 million to 8 million barrels of oil daily, more than 40 percent of OPEC's total. They also account for 20 percent of U.S. imports, 56 percent of Europe's and nearly 70 percent of Japan's. Here at the council's third summit, the Saudis pushed hard for a strong condemnation of Iran and hoped to sign a collective internal security accord as well as a defense pact. They were also reportedly seeking to raise billions of dollars in additional financial aid-$35 billion according to some accounts-to help Iraq finance its war against Iran. Already, the six have provided Iraq somewhere between $25 billion and $30 billion in loans and grants. The Saudis were thwarted on all three accounts, although the six did agree on the first steps to be taken toward setting up a common market starting March 1 as well as approve the principle of closer coordination among their meager armed forces. The reasons for the lack of agreement here on a common stand toward Iran or the immediate conclusion of a collective security and defense pact are numerous. But among the most troubling to the Saudis is the clear trend by two of its Arab Gulf allies-the United Arab Emirates and Kuwait-to seek accommodation rather than increased confrontation with Iran and to keep some independence of action from the kingdom in security and defense affairs. The emirates' ruler, Sheik Zayid, in particular has responded positively to Iranian overtures since last spring. A number of high-level Iranian officials, including Foreign Affairs Minister Ali Akbar Velayati, have visited Abu Dhabi offering enticements such as trade deals and a joint bank. Earlier this month, Iran announced that it was sending its ambassador back to Abu Dhabi, a clear indication of both sides' interest in improving relations even at a time when those between Tehran and Riyadh are steadily deteriorating. Kuwait has also tried to keep its door open to Tehran although it has continued to serve as a transit point for goods and war materiel going to Iraq. Wedged between Iraq and Iran at the top of the Gulf, Kuwait, a city state of only 1.4 million, has long sought to maintain a balanced and "neutral" foreign policy among its powerful neighbors and to keep a measure of independence from Saudi Arabia.

On March 7,1983, Iran's decision to challenge Saudi Arabia's leadership in OPEC on oil pricing and production is rooted in decades of discord between two of the world's largest oil-producing nations. Iranian-Saudi hostility erupted soon after the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries was formed in 1960. Iran and Saudi Arabia were among the five original founders of the cartel that now has 13 member nations. The late Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlavi insisted on overpricing Iran's oil and cheaper Saudi crude drove Iranian oil out of the market in 1976-1977. Now under Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, Iran's covert price discounting and excessive production have forced Saudi output down to 3.6 million barrels a day from about 10 million barrels a day just 20 months ago. Iran, which has an OPEC-assigned daily production quota of 1.2 million barrels, is pumping 3 million barrels a day and covertly selling its oil for as much as $7 less than Saudi Arabia's$34-a-barrel benchmark crude, which is the basis for the cartel's pricing. But the dispute between Iran and Saudi Arabia extends beyond their share of the shrinking world oil market. Iranian Oil Minister Mohammed Gharazi Monday told other OPEC producers the world oil glut is artificial and that they should resist Saudi Oil Minister Sheikh Ahmed Zaki Yamani's lobbying for a price cut and production discipline. Gharazi's implication was clear to those familiar with Iran's position: Saudi Arabia should pump less, making room for Iran and others to produce more. The idea is attractive to Nigeria, Libya, Algeria and non-OPEC Mexico, which need the cash from oil revenues. The Persian Gulf states, which appeared confident they could force OPEC to accept a unified price cut of $4-$5 a barrel by threatening to unilaterally slash their own oil, may regret the decision to ask Iran to come to London for a possible meeting of the full cartel. Gharazi vowed ''to remove the fear which has been thrust upon some of the OPEC members'' by Saudi Arabian oil diplomacy aimed at putting a floor under world oil prices and averting an oil price free fall. But the prospect of a price collapse has raised Iran's hopes that the Saudi hold over OPEC would be further eroded. An additional drop in Saudi production also would strain the kingdom's capacity to finance Iraq's 30-month-old war with Iran. Saudi officials have estimated it takes production of 700,000 to 1 million barrels a day to pay for Iraq's war effort. Iraqi oil output has fallen to 650,000 from a pre-war level of 3.2 million barrels a day. Saudi finance and National Economy Minister Mohammed Ab-Alkhail said last week Saudi Arabia needed to sell more than 6 million barrels a day to cover its current spending requirements. It is no surprise, therefore, that conservative Arab oil states feel the threat from Iran is strategic. The Gulf Arabs have tried to enlist the aid of Britain and other major non-OPEC producers in stabilizing world oil prices and restoring OPEC's share of the world market. In 1982 OPEC supplied less oil than other free world producer for the first time in 20 years.

19880820-19910116 Transition

The Iran-Iraq War ended on August 20, 1988, with a UN proposed cease-fire. This marked the end of formal support by Saudi Arabia to the Iraqis. This in turn ended the motivation for the Iranians to militarily harass the Saudis and the Kuwaitis. 

Iran is conducting indirect negotiations with Saudi Arabia in hopes of restoring diplomatic relations, Iran's Islamic Republic News Agency reported on February 1, 1989. Hashemi Rafsanjani, the speaker of Iran's parliament and acting commander-in-chief of the armed forces, said Iran was ''ready to resume diplomatic ties with Saudi Arabia,'' IRNA reported. ''We are having indirect talks with them to overcome the problem,'' he said, without elaborating. Saudi Arabia broke ties with Iran last April-days after U.S.-Iranian clashes-citing Iranian interference in its affairs and purchased sophisticated Western arms and Chinese intermediate-range ballistic missiles. Relations between Iran and Saudi Arabia reached their lowest point during the Moslem pilgrimage to Mecca nearly two years ago, when 400 mostly Iranian pilgrims died in clashes with Saudi security forces. Rafsanjani, credited with masterminding Iran's acceptance of a cease-fire in the eight-year Persian Gulf war with Iraq, said Tehran was attempting the rapprochement because ''we believe we will get nothing out of isolation.'' Western diplomats said they did not expect Riyadh to restore ties until it was convinced Tehran would stop exporting Islamic fundamentalism to conservative Saudi Arabia. Saudi Arabia, which together with Kuwait bankrolled Iraq during the gulf war, warmly welcomed Iran's acceptance of U.N. Resolution 598 last summer and the cease-fire with Iraq that followed. It also welcomed Iran's contribution to reaching agreement on quotas at last year's OPEC meeting in Vienna. Earlier this week, Iran and Iraq agreed to resume stalled peace talks under the auspices of the United Nations after a two-month break, during which tension rose after Iraq accused Iran of massing troops on the warfront.

King Fahd of Saudi Arabia said on June 14, 1990 he hoped to improve his country's troubled relations with Moslem from Iran. ''With Iran in particular, we have not rejected the principle of improving the atmosphere with them (the Iranians), but we want to eliminate all reasons for the current dispute,'' state-run Riyadh Radio, monitored in Kuwait, quoted Fahd as saying. The remarks were originally published in the Saudi daily Okaz. The dispute he referred to took place four years ago in Islam's holy city of Mecca, when some 400 mostly Iranian pilgrims died in bloody clashes with security forces. The Saudis accused the Iranians of staging political demonstrations at the annual Moslem hajj pilgrimage, and broke ties with Tehran a year later. Fahd offered his olive branch two weeks before the Hajj was scheduled to begin. Iran is boycotting the event for the third consecutive year to protest Saudi-imposed quota restrictions. ''The kingdom's position is to support any genuine effort that would save this nation (Iran) from a lot of suffering and rifts,'' Fahd said. Oman has in the past mediated between Saudi Arabia and Iran, but Riyadh has refused to accept Iranian conditions for a flood of some 150,000 Iranian pilgrims per year, for fear their presence might spark violence in Islam's holiest shrines. The Gulf War started on January 17, 1991 with an aerial bombardment of Iraqi positions in Kuwait. Iran and Saudi Arabia both supported these attacks on Iraq. 

19910117-20159999 0.5 

Saudi-Iranian ties began to improve after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait and its subsequent 1991 Persian Gulf War. Iran took sides with the Kuwaitis and the anti-Iraqi coalition of the Arab Persian Gulf states. This improved Iran's relations with Saudi Arabia and all of its southern Arab neighbors. In particular, Saudi-Iranian relations, especially their diplomatic ones, began to improve. In the 1990s, the two states exchanged high-ranking delegates, even though various remaining grievances on both sides prevented their rapid expansion. 

The 1997 election of Mohammad Khatami as Iranian president was a catalyst for improvement in Iranian-Saudi relations. He pursued a foreign policy aimed at tension reduction and improving ties with foreign countries. This paved the way for a rapid expansion of ties between Iran and its southern Arab neighbors. In particular, that policy put Iranian-Saudi relations on a stable and friendly path. Their bilateral relations encompassing various fields, such as political, economic, educational and security have since grown on a steady basis. They have also coordinated policies within the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries over issues such as oil pricing and production quotas for the member states reflect their cooperative relations. Additionally, Iran Air resumed regular service to Saudi Arabia in 1997. 

Iran has proposed cooperation with Saudi Arabia to shore up the plummeting world prices for oil, Iranian diplomats said on December 5, 1998. Iranian President Mohammad Khatami sent a message to Saudi Crown Prince Abdullah, the official Saudi Press Agency has reported, without disclosing its contents. Iranian diplomats said the message dealt with ''world oil market conditions and coordination of efforts between the two countries to strengthen prices.'' The message, delivered by Iranian ambassador Mohammad Reza Nouri, also said Iran did not hold Saudi Arabia responsible for the fall in oil prices, the diplomats said, speaking on condition of anonymity. Last week, Iran's hard-line newspaper Jomhuri Islami accused Saudi Arabia of ''treachery'' toward the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries or OPEC, the cartel to which both Iran and Saudi Arabia belong. The newspaper said the Saudis were to blame for the current crisis on the oil markets. Nouri told Abdullah that the paper did not reflect the Iranian government's view, the diplomats said. Saudi Arabia and Iran, the two largest producers in OPEC, have been hard hit by falling oil revenues. Iran and Saudi Arabia have traditionally been rivals in OPEC, but their relations have been improving, particularly since Abdullah went to Tehran last year to attend an Islamic summit. Saudi Arabia, the richest country in the Arab world, is grappling with a budget deficit expected to reach dollars 15 billion this year. Iran is trying to reschedule some dollars 6 billion in foreign debts. The Iranian Oil Ministry says that a one dollar fall in the oil price results in an annual loss of dollars 1 billion in revenue for the government.

In 1998, the two states cooperated over a long-standing issue between the two, pilgrimage to Mecca during the Hajj. On numerous occasions in the past Iranian Shi'ites demonstrated Sunni Saudi officials. In 1998, many of these issues were dealt with cooperatively. Though there were still problems, the two states are working together in efforts to resolve this issue. 

The two states have also cooperated on security affairs since 1997. As the largest and the richest Persian Gulf countries with certain influence, Iran and Saudi Arabia have the capabilities to affect the pace of events in their region. Iran and Saudi Arabia have signed a few security agreements since 1997, including one in April 2002 during the official visit to Iran of Saudi Minister of the Interior Amir Nayef bin Abdulaziz. Not much official information is available regarding these agreements, but it is thought that they include cooperation towards the elimination of extremist and terrorist organizations.

The Saudi Foreign Ministry did release information on Iran's handing over of suspected al-Qaeda members to the Saudi authorities.

A senior Iranian envoy held talks this week with Saudi Arabia's Crown Prince Abdullah on ways to boost sagging oil prices, a Tehran daily reported on January 28, 1999. Abdollah Nouri, a close adviser of Iran's President Mohammad Khatami, met with Abdullah in Saudi Arabia for more than one hour, the daily Khordad said. It said that Nouri delivered a message from Khatami to Abdullah, but did not say what that message was. The two talked about bilateral relations, and emphasized the need for cooperation to prevent further falls in the price of oil, the paper said. Iran and Saudi Arabia, the two largest producers inside the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, are trying to grapple with falling oil revenues from record-low prices. The head of Iran's parliamentary oil commission has blamed Saudi Arabia for the current oil crisis, saying the kingdom has inflicted more damage on Iran with its oil policy than Iraq did during its 1980-88 war with Iran. Iran has always maintained that Saudi Arabia's OPEC production quota is excessive, and at Iran's expense. Saudi Arabia has a daily production quota of 8 million barrels, while Iran, the second-largest OPEC producer, has a quota of 3.3 million barrels. In the past Saudi Arabia accused Iran of producing beyond its PEC quota, a charge that Iran denied.

Iran's Ambassador to Saudi Arabia, Ali Asghar Khaji, said in Riyadh on 10 March, 2002, that relations between Iran and Saudi Arabia are at a good level. Speaking on the sidelines of the opening ceremony of Iran's first specialized exhibition in Dhahran, Khaji denied reports that Tehran-Riyadh ties are at a low level. He added that Iran and Saudi Arabia have similar views on regional and international issues and that the two countries have increased their level of consultations in different fields. Referring to the visit to Saudi Arabia by the Deputy Foreign Minister for Arab-African Affairs, Mohammad Sadr, who delivered President Mohammad Khatami's message to King Fahd, Khaji said that Sadr's meetings with Saudi officials were very positive. Regarding Iran's viewpoint on the Middle East peace plan proposed by Saudi Crown Prince Abdallah, the Iranian ambassador said Tehran was informed of the plan, although the crown prince has said the proposal is a general plan and needs more work.

King Fahd of Saudi Arabia used to be demonized by Iran for his ties with America, for bank-rolling Saddam Hussein's war against Iran and for the treatment of Iranians making the haj, the annual pilgrimage to Mecca. In 1987, after several hundred Iranian pilgrims were killed in clashes with Saudi security forces, Ayatollah Khomeini, founder of Iran's Islamic revolution, said that he might one day forgive Sad-dam, but never King Fahd. Khomeini's successors, however, appear to be more indulgent. Instead of accusing their neighbour of harbouring a corrupt and Americanized form of Islam, Iran's leaders now call Saudi Arabia an important pillar of the Muslim world. Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, a former president and now an adviser to Iran's spiritual leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, made a two-week trip to Saudi Arabia in March 1998, the first visit by a senior Iranian since the revolution. His trip, he said, had melted a "mountain of ice". When Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia represented his brother, the king, at an Islamic summit last December, he was treated reverently as guest of honor. The Saudis used to fear Iran as an exporter of the "revolution of the oppressed masses". In particular, they were deeply distrustful of Iran's efforts to politicize the Hajj, at which millions of Muslims from around the world converge each year, by holding a "disavowal of the pagans" rally against Israel and America as part of the ceremony. It was this sort of demonstration that turned bloody in 1987. For this year's Hajj, which reaches its climax on April 6th, Iranian officials turned down the rhetoric, barely mentioning the ritual demonstration. The Saudis, for their part, have raised the quota for Iranians: around 85,000 are making the pilgrimage this year compared with the 60,000 or so who have gone in recent years. Moreover, they will be allowed to perform their own distinct Shia prayers. Even so, Iran claimed last week that some of its pilgrims in Saudi Arabia had been harassed at their devotions, and called on the Saudi authorities to do something about it. In the new spirit of friendship, Iran's interior minister paid an unexpected visit to the scene. As the two top producers of the Organisation of Petroleum-Exporting Countries, Saudi Arabia and Iran share a crucial interest in current efforts to stabilise oil prices. They should take "revolutionary" measures, said Mr Rafsanjani, to control production. Yet it was not always so. The two countries have often gone opposite ways within the energy cartel, with Iran fiercely accusing Saudi Arabia of following American policies in oil matters. Where does Iran hope that this rapprochement with Saudi Arabia will lead? Eventually, to an end to America's military presence in the Gulf. The need for such forces will be greatly diminished, argues Iran, if it succeeds in proving its new peaceful intentions towards its old Arab Gulf enemies. The Americans will need quite a bit of convincing of that.

On August 6, 2002, the Saudi Arabian and Omani foreign ministers are currently in Tehran while the Zionists' crimes against the Palestinians are continuing and the Islamic world is dealing with the Iraqi issue. These new developments have brought Islamic countries together in order to take the necessary measures to solve these problems. Iran and Saudi Arabia are two major powers in the Islamic world whose decisions have been influential in determining trends of developments. Iranian and Saudi officials plan to discuss important issues such as the Middle East crisis, the Iraqi issue, terrorism, oil, and the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC).

On 11 September, 2002, Iran's President Seyyed Mohammad Khatami arrived to Saudi Arabia 11 September for a day-long pilgrimage visit. The President of the Islamic Republic of Iran will pay homage to the holy shrine of the Prophet of Islam and the Baqi'a Cemetery Imams and then leave for performing the minor Hajj Umra' rituals in Holy Mecca. President Khatami is scheduled to meet Saudi Arabia's Crown Prince Abdallah Bin-Abd-al-Aziz on Saturday in Jedda, where he would discuss the latest regional developments, as well as bilateral relations with that country's de facto leader. The Saudi press and mass media have evaluated the Iranian President's ongoing trip of high sensitivity and extreme importance under the tense, current political-military atmosphere of the Mideast region. Riyadh and Tehran drastically improved comprehensive ties ever since a few years ago, short after President Khatami took charge of the office.

On 16 March, 2003, Iran's Foreign Minister Kamal Kharrazi will visit Saudi Arabia this week within the framework of regular consultations between Tehran and Riyadh on various issues. An official in Iran's Embassy here said that the two sides will discuss regional and international issues, particularly the latest developments on the US-led war on Iraq and finding a peaceful solution to this impasse. They will also review possible ways of bolstering bilateral ties in all fields.

The Saudi Minister of Commerce and Industry Hashim Bin-Abdallah Bin-Hashim Yamani on 14 March, 2004, held talks with Iranian Parliament Speaker Mehdi Karrubi on Tehran-Riyadh cooperation. At the meeting, Karrubi referred to the close Iran-Saudi relations and called for boosting parliamentary cooperation between the two countries, especially within the Islamic Interparliamentary Union (IIPU). He said that the current situation in the region and the entire world requires the Islamic nations to reinforce solidarity through regional and international cooperation to deal with threats against the Muslims. Karrubi said that Iran and Saudi Arabia enjoy extensive capacity to develop economic cooperation through activation of Tehran-Riyadh Economic Commission. He called for following up the accords already signed between the two countries and said that Iranian parliament supports boosting commerce with Saudi Arabia. Karrubi said that the sixth Majlis approved legislation easing the procedure for foreign investment and modification of taxes in international trade, so the ground is well prepared for enhanced economic cooperation with Saudi Arabia. Yamani, who is also the cochairman of Tehran-Riyadh economic commission, said that trade between Iran and Saudi Arabia is growing and hoped that his talks with Iranian officials would lead to a boost in economic cooperation. He said that the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has launched economic reform program which will practically contribute to closer economic cooperation with Iran. 

On 15 August, 2004, Saudi Arabian Crown Prince Abdullah in Teheran considered Iran as a brotherly and friendly country, beyond just a neighbor for Saudi Arabia. Prince Abdullah made the remarks in a farewell meeting with Iran's Ambassador to Riyadh Ali Asghar Khaji, saying: "We fully trust our Iranian brothers in all areas." He expressed his satisfaction with growing Tehran-Riyadh relations, adding there has been a considerable improvement in bilateral relations between the two Muslim, friendly and neighboring countries in recent years. The Saudi crown prince also termed as fruitful the role played by Khaji in promoting mutual cooperation in the past four years and wished him success. Khaji, for his part, underlined the determination of Iran's leadership and authorities to develop cooperation between the two countries in all areas. He appreciated the efforts made by the Saudi crown prince to develop mutual relations between Iran and Saudi Arabia. Iran-Saudi Arabia cooperation has led to promoting bilateral relations and making some achievements in the interests of the regional countries and the world of Islam, the Iranian diplomat added. Khaji also submitted the Saudi crown prince a message from President Mohammad Khatami dealing with mutual relations.

On May 18, 2005, Iran and Saudi Arabia signed a 49-article memorandum of understanding (MoU) at the end of the 7th session of Iran-Saudi Arabia Joint Economic Commission. The accord was inked by Iranian Commerce Minister Mohammad Shariatmadari and his Saudi counterpart Hashim bin Abdallah bin Yamani. Based on the agreement, the Iranian Banks of Melli and Parsian are due to establish new branches in Jeddah. The agreement also sets the framework for Iran to hold exclusive exhibitions in Saudi Arabia. The sides expressed their readiness to establish joint companies for construction of automobiles and spare parts, production of cement and extraction of minerals. Iran announced its interest to export different kinds of automobiles, agricultural and road-building machinery and medical instrument. Under the agreement, Iran and Saudi Arabia are to expand cooperation in the fields of sea and land transportation, electricity, joint venture, news, construction of power plant and exchanging experts and expertise.

Worried by Iran's deepening involvement in the Arab world, Saudi Arabia has been working quietly to curtail the Shiite nation's influence and prevent the marginalization of Sunni Muslims in the region's hotspots. Analysts said on December 3, 2006, that the tug-of-war between the two Mideast powers signals a new chapter in an uneasy relationship, one that has swung over the years between wariness and at times outright confrontation. On the surface, both countries have maintained the civil front that has marked ties since a thaw in relations in the early 1990s. "But events on the ground indicate that the two countries are working against each other as their differences are played out outside their borders," said Ibrahim Bayram, a reporter for the Lebanese An-Nahar newspaper, who follows the country's pro-Iranian Hezbollah group. Saudi Arabia, a key U.S. ally in the region, has been putting its economic and diplomatic weight behind groups in direct confrontation with factions backed by Iran in every major conflict zone in the region Iraq, Lebanon and the Palestinian territories. The kingdom has also expressed concerns over Iran's nuclear program. The U.S. contends Iran is seeking to develop nuclear weapons, which Iran denies. But Saudi Arabia has fears even about a peaceful nuclear program because of the possible environmental threat and the potential for conflict between Iran and U.S. troops stationed in Kuwait, Qatar and Bahrain. A Saudi official said Iran has sent messages expressing its desire to work with the kingdom to resolve the area's conflicts. But the official said Iran's actions speak louder than those messages, making Saudi Arabia cautious in dealing with Tehran. He spoke on condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the issue. The tense situation has also made the kingdom more determined to explore ways to find a settlement to Mideast upheavals on its own. Saudi Arabia has stepped up attempts to reconcile Iraq's fractious groups and has invited Iraqi leaders for talks, including anti-American Shiite cleric Muqtada al-Sadr and Harith al-Dhari, head of Iraq's influential Sunni Association of Muslim Scholars. It has also been talking to Iraq's Sunnis to urge them to renounce violence and become more involved in the political process. Elsewhere, the kingdom is supporting the U.S.-backed Lebanese Prime Minister Fuad Saniora, who is facing street protests organized by Hezbollah meant to topple the government. The Saudis are also backing beleaguered Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas, who is trying to work out a new unity government with the militant Hamas group, which is allied to Iran. The relationship between Iran and Saudi Arabia has long been uneasy, especially after the 1979 Iranian revolution. Saudi Arabia sided with Baghdad in the 1980-88 Iran-Iraq war, and Riyadh and Tehran were openly hostile at the height of the conflict. Iran frequently called on Muslims to overthrow the Saudi ruling family, seize its oil wealth and strip it of its role as guardian of Islamic holy places. Riyadh accused Tehran of trying to undermine its security and broke off relations in 1988. But distrust between the two countries eased after Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's death in 1989, and diplomatic relations were restored shortly after the 1991 Gulf War. Saudi analysts say Iran is now trying to wrest the traditional leadership role Riyadh has played in the region. But Saudi Arabia will "not allow Iran to expand at its expense as a big regional power," said Dawood al-Shirian, a Saudi journalist. "Iran is acting as a Persian state and not as an Islamic state," he said. "The conflict in the region is not a Sunni-Shiite conflict. It's a Persian-Arab conflict." The view from Iran is different, said Mashaallah Shamsolvaezin, an adviser to the Middle East Strategic Studies Center in Tehran, which is closely affiliated with the Iranian Foreign Ministry. He said a change in Iranian foreign policy to focus on improving economic and political ties with Middle Eastern countries instead of Europe has prompted the Saudi fears. He said the political shift is not coming at the expense of traditional powers like Saudi Arabia and Egypt. He blamed Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's "radical" rhetoric for Tehran's failure to send a reassuring message about its policy shifts. "His statements not only have not helped. They have hurt Iran's strategic policies," he said.

PS-SOURCES: New York Times March 11, 1958; November 14, 1968; April 26, 1970; September 25, 1982; Washington Post December 19, 1977; November 25, 1982; January 26, 1983; BBC February 9, 1980; March 11, 2002; August 6, 2002; September 11, 2002; March 16, 2003; March 15, 2004; August 15, 2004; Associated Press December 5, 1998; January 28, 1999; December 3, 2006; Asia Pulse May 18, 2005; The Economist April 4, 1998; United Press International March 7, 1983; February 19, 1985, February 1, 1989; June 14, 1990

MARITIME-MIDS:

MARITIME-DISPUTE:

Discussion:

SOURCES: Gibler, D.M. 2018. Militarized Interstate Dispute Narratives, 1816-2010. Langham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. 
