FILE: cm645651v11.0.txt
DYAD: IRAQ-EGYPT
RIVALRY: RIV1219
DISPUTE(S): MID2998 MID2997 MID122 
RIVALRY: RIV1220
DISPUTE(S): MID3957 MID4273 

RIVNOTES: 

PS: 19590310-19620228 0.25 19620301-19900810 0.5 19900811-20001106 0.25 20001107-20209999 0.5

PS-UPDATE2020:

PS-NOTES:

PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20220321
PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20220321

Territorial-Maritime-Boundary Issues Variables

MID2998 

TERRMID: MID2998 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID2998 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID2998 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID2998 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID2998 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID2998 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID2998 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID2998 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID2998 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID2998 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID2998 from Gibler 2018, in 1959 Iraq attacked a Syrian village. Syria was supporting the anti-Iraq rebels fighting against the communist regime in Iraq, and Iraq was attacking those rebels in Syria. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to militarized rebels in Syria. 

CIVWARLINK: MID2998 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID2998 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID2998 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID2998 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID2998 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID2998 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID2997 

TERRMID: MID2997 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID2997 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID2997 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID2997 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID2997 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID2997 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID2997 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID2997 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID2997 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID2997 3 -- uncertain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID2997 this MID involves an attempted coup, but Iraq was also experiencing civil conflict involving militarized rebels. 

CIVWARLINK: MID2997 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID2997 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID2997 1 -- coup MID
COUPMID-CER: MID2997 3 -- uncertain 
COUPMID-NOTES: MID2997 from Gibler 2018 and Blackwell 1999, the Iraqi Premier had recently survived an assassination attempt and accused Syria of plotting another one. Iraq claimed a Syrian battalion of border troops was evidence that another coup attempt was imminent. However, no evidence of these claims could be found, and it is possible that they are fabricated. Coded coup MID because this was connected to a coup attempt in Iraq, in which military elites attempted to overthrow the government. Coded uncertain because Iraq's claims of Syrian support for rebels and a coup, as well as a threatening display of border troops, may be fabricated. 

COUPLINK: MID2997 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID2997 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID122

TERRMID: MID122 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID122 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID122 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID122 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID122 from Gibler 2018, Iraq in 1961 claimed all of Kuwait as Iraq territory and threatened to annex it. In response, the Arab League admitted Kuwait as a member and formed a coalition to defend it from Iraqi invasion. As part of the Arab League, Egypt issued a threat to Iraq warning them not to use force against Kuwait. Coded third party link to territorial MID because this was connected to Iraq's claim on all of Kuwait's territory. 

MARITMID: MID122 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID122 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: MID122 Because Iraq claimed all of Kuwait, this included a claim on Kuwait's maritime waters. Coded not maritime because the maritime dispute is not between Egypt and Iraq, but Egypt is linked to the maritime dispute between Iraq and Kuwait here. 

ISLMID: MID122 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID122 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID122 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID122 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID122 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID122 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID122 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID122 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID122 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID122 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID3957 

TERRMID: MID3957 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID3957 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID3957 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID3957 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID3957 from Gibler 2018, this is the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. Egypt, as part of a coalition, expelled Iraq from Kuwait. Coded third party link to territorial dispute because the Gulf War was a territorial dispute between Iraq and Kuwait, and Egypt became involved to expel Iraq from Kuwait. 

MARITMID: MID3957 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID3957 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID3957 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID3957 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID3957 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID3957 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID3957 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID3957 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID3957 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID3957 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID3957 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID3957 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID4273

TERRMID: MID4273 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID4273 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID4273 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID4273 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID4273 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID4273 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID4273 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4273 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4273 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4273 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID4273 from cm narrative, this MID involves Iraq's refusal to comply with UN weapons inspectors and enforcement of the no-fly zone. Iraq expelled weapons inspectors and repeatedly violated the no-fly zone. The US and UK repeatedly threatened Iraq and eventually bombed them over a four day period. Egypt was part of a coalition of states that participated in a show of force to deter Iraq from further violations. Coded civil war MID because this MID involved violation and enforcement of the no-fly zone over Iraq. The no-fly zone was put in place to prevent Saddam Hussein from attacking militarized rebels in Kurdistan. 

CIVWARLINK: MID4273 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4273 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID4273 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4273 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4273 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4273 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID607

TERRMID: MID607 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID607 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID607 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID607 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID607 from Gibler 2018, the Baghdad Pact countries (Iraq, Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan) had a series of disputes with the Soviet-backed countries of Syria and Egypt from 1956-1958. In 1956, Iraq warned Syria that it would use force to defend itself if Syria continued to (allegedly) lie about Iraq sending arms into Syria to foment unrest. The Baghdad pact members were also concerned about Soviet support for Syria. Also in 1956, Syria protested that Turkey was threatening to attack and amassing troops at the border with Syria. Jordan warned that aggression to Syria would be seen as aggression to Jordan. In 1957, the Baghdad Pact members and the Soviet-backed countries disputed the future of Jordan, as the Baghdad Pact countries feared that the Soviet Union, Egypt, and Syria were preparing to split Jordan amongst themselves. Iraq threatened force if Jordan was split. Turkey deployed troops to the border with Syria, and NATO countries conducted shows of force. Syrian and Turksih forces clashed on the border. Coded third party link to territorial MID because this was connected to a dispute over Jordan, outside this dyad.

MARITMID: MID607 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID607 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID607 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID607 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID607 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID607 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID607 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID607 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID607 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID607 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID607 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID607 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID3 1993-2001:

MID4273
rivalry=645651 nationa=EGYPT nationb=IRAQ MID4273 19991022-19991022 
 revtype1a=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2a=NOT APPLICABLE fatala=NONE fatalpa=0 lhosta=DISPLAY OF FORCE 
 revtype1b=POLICY revtype2b=NOT APPLICABLE fatalb=> 999 DEATHS fatalpb=.
lhostb=WAR 

The dispute began (10/7/1997) because of increasing intransigence by Iraq. Iraq increased the frequency with which it violated the no-fly zones and threatened to refuse to allow Americans on the UN inspections team. Most importantly, Iraq threatened to shoot down an American U-2 spy plane. The United States and the United Kingdom responded by threatening military action if Iraq attempted to shoot down an American plane. Kuwait responded to the heightened tension between the United States, the United Kingdom, and Iraq by putting its troops on alert. On 11/13/1997, Iraq carried out its threat to expel US Arms inspectors. The United States and the United Kingdom began preparing for punitive air strikes against Iraq if Iraq did not begin to cooperate with UN weapons inspectors. On 11/23/1997, Iraq allowed weapons inspectors to reenter, but it continued to hamper UN investigations, restricting access to selected sites. On 1/17/1998, Iraq again threatened to expel weapons inspectors, requesting that economic sanctions against it be lifted. The United States reiterated its threat to use force if Iraq did not allow UN inspectors unrestricted access to all suspected sites. The US and UK military buildup in the region continued and they announced that their forces were combat ready (2/7/1998). In MIDNovember, the United States reissued its threat to use force against Iraq if it did not unconditionally comply with UN weapons inspectors. All remaining weapons inspectors withdrew in response to the United States' warning. Iraq capitulated on 11/15/1998, promising to comply with the UN inspection teams. The United States and the United Kingdom stated that if Iraq did not continue to comply, they would use force against it. On 12/10, Iraq ended cooperation with UN inspectors. The United States and the United Kingdom announced that they would attack Iraq without warning for breaking it promise of full cooperation. On 11/16, they began "Operation Desert Fox," a four-day bombing campaign against Iraq. Israel also put its military on alert, fearing that Iraq would attack it in retaliation for U.S. and British military actions against Iraq. Almost immediately after the American and British bombing campaign, Iraq stated that it would challenge the no-fly zones in northern and southern Iraq (11/1998; 1/3/1999). There were clashes on almost a daily basis between British and American planes patrolling the northern and southern no-fly zones and Iraqi military installations from December 1998 to October 2001. Although clashes between the United States, the United Kingdom, and Iraq occurred almost continuously until October, Iraqi challenges to the no-fly zones escalated in August 2001 and were more frequent until mid-October. On 2/15/1999, Iraq threatened to attack Turkey if it continued to allow American planes to use its bases. On 2/2/1999, the United States and the United Kingdom announced that they would retaliate if fired upon, by bombing pre-determined targets in Iraq that were deemed threatening. The United States and the United Kingdom engaged in numerous retaliatory bombing campaigns on Iraqi targets through October (2001), as Iraq continued to threaten and fire upon American and British planes patrolling the no-fly zones. On 10/22/1999, 11 nations (USA, UK, Egypt, United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Jordan, France, Italy, Netherlands, Greece, and Germany) participated in joint military exercises to demonstrate that an anti-Iraq coalition could still be formed. On 5/23/2001 and 8/24/2001, an Iraqi patrol crossed into Saudi territory and fired on a Saudi border patrol. Iraq acted in order to demonstrate its disapproval of Saudi aid to the United States. On 6/11/2001, Saudi Arabia seized a unused pipeline from Iraq in retaliation for Iraqi violations of Saudi borders. First and last day of dispute was on 10/22/1999.

NOTE THAT EGYPT IS ONLY INVOLVED FOR ONE DAY

NARRATIVE-CM:
Iraq condemned Egypt for its policies regarding Israel on December 5, 1977. 
Egypt severed diplomatic relations with Iraq on December 5, 1977.

SOURCES-CM:

NARRATIVE-CR:
The first portion of the rivalry between Egypt and Iraq has to do with alignment in the Cold War. In the first two MIDs Iraq is receiving aid from the Soviets and Nasser is trying to chart his own Pan Arab course in which the Arab nations are not dependent on other nations for support or aid. He does not want to get caught up in the Cold War politics of East versus West. One of the MIDs also is a territorial dispute over the sovereignty of Kuwait. Iraq lays historical claims to Kuwait that date to the Ottoman empire and Egypt participates in an Arab League effort to ensure Kuwaiti security against Iraq. This issue comes up again in two mids in the 1990s, as Egypt aligns with Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, the US and many others in opposition to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. 

MID2998 occurred in mid March 1959. During this period there was a short lived attempt at a coup to over through the government which favored and received support from the Soviets. The Nasserites attempted to take over the government but were unsuccessful. Iraq accused Egypt of being directly involved. Nasser accused Premier Kassim of Iraq of attempted to topple Nasser with communist Egyptians. 

MID2997 occurred on October 1, 1959. I could not find reference to this mid in contemporary newspaper accounts or in the text references listed below. It was a one day mid with Egypt displaying force of some kind. It seems to have been a response by Nasser to the killings of anti-Kassim protesters in Iraq. Nasser and Kassim do not seem to have seen eye to eye, with Kassim to close to Soviet Union for Nasser's pan-Arabic desires. 

On June 25, 1961 (the start date of MID122), six days after Kuwait had gained independence, the Iraqi Prime Minister, General Kassim, laid claim to all of Kuwait, arguing that the latter had been an integral part of Basra province under Ottoman rule and that Iraq had succeeded to Turkish territorial sovereignty over Basra with the dissolution of the Ottoman empire after World War I. Kuwait rejected the Iraqi arguments and requested military assistance in response to rumors that Iraq was moving troops southwards in the Basra area. Britain and Saudi Arabia arrived in Kuwait by early July 1961 and Kuwait mobilized its own forces. Efforts by the U.N. Security Council to defuse the crisis were unsuccessful and mediation was taken over by the Arab league (this is where Egypt's involvement comes in). On August 12 the Arab league countries, Iraq alone dissenting, signed an agreement with Kuwait under which British forces were to be replaced by a force from the Arab League who pledged to preserve the territorial integrity of Kuwait against any aggression, to render the Sheikhdom immediate assistance if attacked. Iraq continued to iterate its claim to Kuwait and withdrew its representatives from all countries which had recognized that country (including Egypt).

It appears that the issues between Iraq and Egypt change after this first series of mids. Iraq becomes hostile towards Egypt after the 1973 War with Israel. Iraq along with Syria and Libya are dismayed at Sadat when he does not continue to drive towards Israel in the Sinai as the war plans had called for. Later in the decade relations improved as there were several diplomatic, cultural and trade exchanges between the two. Relations between the two countries grew friendly over the years. Part of the impetus for this development was the ouster of Egypt from the Arab League and its ostracization by much of the Arab world for its Camp David Accords. Egypt could ill afford to widen the rift in relations. Thus it proceed with caution on sensitive issues it could afford to overlook. In 1989 however, Egypt was brought back into the fold of the Arab League-in fact Iraq was the most ardent supporter of readmitting Egypt to the Arab League. However, just after being readmitted to the Arab League, Egypt and Iraq experienced a crisis in relations. Perhaps Egypt could now afford to allow relations to deteriorate with an ally after readmission. This issue had to do with Egyptian workers taking the jobs of Iraqi men who had been fighting in the war with Iran. Iraq decided to limit the amount of remittances and to limit guest workers. The issue was inflamed by reports of abuse by Iraqi authorities towards the Egyptian workers when they staged a demonstration in Baghdad. There were reports of angry Iraqi's murdering Egyptian workers. 

For MID3957 (8/11/1990 to 03/03/1991), this dispute revolves around the post-Persian Gulf War settlements and the violation of the no fly zone by Iraq resulting in clashes between Iraqi and U.S. and British jets. 

Egypt was not directly involved in these clashes but fully supported the United States and other coalition member's framework for dealing with post war Iraq. Specific issues relating to Egypt revolve around Iraq's bellicose and anti-American tone throughout this period and Egypt's continued support for U.S. policy. In some unrelated issues: Iraq at the time was suspicious of Israel and felt that Israel was preparing to launch a preemptive strike against Baghdad, which Egypt opposed. Finally, issues relating to Israel and U.S. support of Israel were another source of contention between Egypt and Iraq, Egypt again attempting to curb Iraq's bellicose and anti-American oratory. MID4273 The dispute began (10/7/1997) because of increasing intransigence by Iraq. Iraq increased the frequency with which it violated the no-fly zones and threatened to refuse to allow Americans on the UN inspections team. Most importantly, Iraq threatened to shoot down an American U-2 spy plane. The United States and the United Kingdom responded by threatening military action if Iraq attempted to shoot down an American plane. Kuwait responded to the heightened tension between the United States, the United Kingdom, and Iraq by putting its troops on alert. On 11/13/1997, Iraq carried out its threat to expel US Arms inspectors. The United States and the United Kingdom began preparing for punitive air strikes against Iraq if Iraq did not begin to cooperate with UN weapons inspectors. On 11/23/1997, Iraq allowed weapons inspectors to reenter, but it continued to hamper UN investigations, restricting access to selected sites. On 1/17/1998, Iraq again threatened to expel weapons inspectors, requesting that economic sanctions against it be lifted. The United States reiterated its threat to use force if Iraq did not allow UN inspectors unrestricted access to all suspected sites. The US and UK military buildup in the region continued and they announced that their forces were combat ready (2/7/1998). In mid-November, the United States reissued its threat to use force against Iraq if it did not unconditionally comply with UN weapons inspectors. All remaining weapons inspectors withdrew in response to the United States' warning. Iraq capitulated on 11/15/1998, promising to comply with the UN inspection teams. The United States and the United Kingdom stated that if Iraq did not continue to comply, they would use force against it. On 12/10, Iraq ended cooperation with UN inspectors. The United States and the United Kingdom announced that they would attack Iraq without warning for breaking it promise of full cooperation. On 11/16, they began "Operation Desert Fox," a four-day bombing campaign against Iraq. Israel also put its military on alert, fearing that Iraq would attack it in retaliation for U.S. and British military actions against Iraq. Almost immediately after the American and British bombing campaign, Iraq stated that it would challenge the no-fly zones in northern and southern Iraq (11/1998; 1/3/1999). There were clashes on almost a daily basis between British and American planes patrolling the northern and southern no-fly zones and Iraqi military installations from December 1998 to October 2001. Although clashes between the United States, the United Kingdom, and Iraq occurred almost continuously until October, Iraqi challenges to the no-fly zones escalated in August 2001 and were more frequent until mid-October. On 2/15/1999, Iraq threatened to attack Turkey if it continued to allow American planes to use its bases. On 2/2/1999, the United States and the United Kingdom announced that they would retaliate if fired upon, by bombing pre-determined targets in Iraq that were deemed threatening. The United States and the United Kingdom engaged in numerous retaliatory bombing campaigns on Iraqi targets through October (2001), as Iraq continued to threaten and fire upon American and British planes patrolling the no-fly zones. On 10/22/1999, 11 nations (USA, UK, Egypt, United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Jordan, France, Italy, Netherlands, Greece, and Germany) participated in joint military exercises to demonstrate that an anti-Iraq coalition could still be formed. On 5/23/2001 and 8/24/2001, an Iraqi patrol crossed into Saudi territory and fired on a Saudi border patrol. Iraq acted in order to demonstrate its disapproval of Saudi aid to the United States. On 6/11/2001, Saudi Arabia seized a unused pipeline from Iraq in retaliation for Iraqi violations of Saudi borders. 

In the years following the Gulf War Egypt held to a consistent line towards Iraq. It advocated disapproval of Saddam Hussein but sympathy for the Iraqi people. For example, the killing of Hussein Kamil and his brother who had defected to Jordan in 1995 and returned to Baghdad in 1996 was condemned in the Egyptian press. Formally, the Egyptians supported the sanctions against the Iraqi regime and have been an ally of the US in its role of opposition towards Iraq. 

SOURCES-CR: 
Facts on File: New York Times, March, 1959; MECS, 1977-1992. 

PS-NARRATIVE: 

The military occupation of Iraq during World War II by Britain ended on October 26, 1947. On October 12, 1948, both Iraq and Egypt officially recognized the new Arab Palestine government asserting sovereignty over all of Palestine. On August 25, 1949, Egypt finished two days of talks with Iraq's Premier. During the talks the two countries agreed on Arab unity and how to reorganize the League of Arab States for better results. On February 9, 1950, Iraq and Egypt signed an agreement to keep out of Syrian domestic politics for the following five years. On October 23, 1951, Iraqi Premier Nuri Al-Said pledged Iraq's support to Egypt's struggle to throw off the British control of the Suez canal and from the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan. Ending on September 17, 1954, Egypt and Iraq hold three days talks about their good relationships and the future of the Middle East politics. They agreed on almost everything, except the selling of American weapons to the region. Iraq was strongly in favor of accepting these weapons, while Egypt cautioned Iraq over this issue. The defense pact Iraq signed with Turkey as part of the Baghdad Pact in 1955, was not perceived well by Egypt which saw this action as directed against the unity of the Arab world. On June 22, 1955, the Iraqi ambassador to Egypt, Najeeb el Rawy said that the relations between the two countries improved significantly once the bitter exchange of propaganda assaults started after the signing of the Baghdad Pact was terminated. 

19590310-19620228 RIV1219-0.25 

The first portion of the rivalry between Egypt and Iraq has to do with alignment in the Cold War. In the first two mids Iraq is receiving aid from the Soviets and Nasser is trying to chart his own Pan Arab course in which the Arab nations are not dependent on other nations for support or aid. He does not want to get caught up in the Cold War politics of East versus West. One of the mids also is a territorial dispute over the sovereignty of Kuwait. Iraq lays historical claims to Kuwait that date to the Ottoman Empire and Egypt participates in an Arab League effort to ensure Kuwaiti security against Iraq. This issue comes up again in two mids in the 1990s, as Egypt aligns with Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, the US and many others in opposition to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. 

MID2998 occurred in mid March 1959. During this period there was a short lived attempt at a coup to over through the government which favored and received support from the Soviets. The Nasserites attempted to take over the government but were unsuccessful. Iraq accused Egypt of being directly involved. Nasser accused Premier Kassim of Iraq of attempted to topple Nasser with communist Egyptians. 

MID2997 occurred on October 1, 1959. I could not find reference to this mid in contemporary newspaper accounts or in the text references listed below. It was a one day mid with Egypt displaying force of some kind. It seems to have been a response by Nasser to the killings of anti-Kassim protesters in Iraq. Nasser and Kassim do not seem to have seen eye to eye, with Kassim to close to Soviet Union for Nasser's pan-Arabic desires. 

On June 25, 1961 (the start date of MID122), six days after Kuwait had gained independence, the Iraqi Prime Minister, General Kassim, laid claim to all of Kuwait, arguing that the latter had been an integral part of Basra province under Ottoman rule and that Iraq had succeeded to Turkish territorial sovereignty over Basra with the dissolution of the Ottoman empire after World War I. Kuwait rejected the Iraqi arguments and requested military assistance in response to rumors that Iraq was moving troops southwards in the Basra area. Britain and Saudi Arabia arrived in Kuwait by early July 1961 and Kuwait mobilized its own forces. Efforts by the U.N. Security Council to defuse the crisis were unsuccessful and mediation was taken over by the Arab league (this is where Egypt's involvement comes in). On August 12 the Arab league countries, Iraq alone dissenting, signed an agreement with Kuwait under which British forces were to be replaced by a force from the Arab League who pledged to preserve the territorial integrity of Kuwait against any aggression, to render the Sheikhdom immediate assistance if attacked. Iraq continued to iterate its claim to Kuwait and withdrew its representatives from all countries which had recognized that country (including Egypt).

19620301-19900810 0.5 

The period from 1962 to 1990 is one of cooperation, even though Egypt and Iraq broke off diplomatic relations for about 10 years between 1977 and 1987. Egypt was an important ally of Iraq during the 1980-1988 Iraq-Iran war by selling weapons to Saddam Hussein's military. It seemed that the diplomatic break of relations did not cause any major problems between the countries' cooperation. Egypt and Iraq were allies during the 1967 and 1973 wars against Israel.

On April 17, 1962, Egypt, Syria and Iraq signed a union charter, but by July 27 1963 the relations between them soured. An Egyptian campaign to isolate the hardline Baathist regime of Iraq which is hostile to Cairo's moves to settle the conflict with Israel was intensified on that date. Egypt and Iraq were allies during the Yom Kippur War against Israel. 

On December 5, 1977 Egypt broke off diplomatic relations with five countries, including Iraq. These countries opposed Egypt's bid for peace with Israel. 

Decisions to "boycott" Egypt were passed by the conference of the foreign and economic ministers of the Arab countries in Baghdad on April 1, 1979, after five days of deliberations and consultations. The conference which opened on March 27 decided "to call back the ambassadors of Arab states from Egypt immediately" and "to recommend to sever political and diplomatic relations with the Egyptian government. The Arab governments should undertake the required measures to implement this recommendation within a month after the publication of this resolution and according to the constitutional measures prevailing in each country."

Egyptian President Anwar Sadat revealed on April 1, 1981, that Egypt was selling ammunition to Iraq, one of its strongest critics in the Arab world. He said in a speech the sale was in gratitude for past Iraqi arms deliveries to Egypt-but he still believed Baghdad had been wrong to launch the Persian Gulf war by invading Iran last year. Until now Cairo has remained strictly neutral in the Gulf conflict and Mr. Sadat said the ammunition sale should not be seen as a change in his position. But Syria immediately accused Iraq of collusion with Egypt. Commenting on Mr. Sadat's statement, the official Syrian news agency SANA said: "The Iraqi regime of (President) Saddam Hussein has once more revealed its co-operation and conspiracy with the Egyptian President." "Sadat today admitted the establishment of co-ordination and co-o peration with Iraq's ruler when he confirmed having supplied the Iraqi regime with arms and ammunition. "The shipments, through Jordan, are meant for use in Iraq's unjust war against the revolution in Iran." Iraq was one of the Arab states that led the campaign to isolate Egypt after it signed its 1979 peace treaty with Israel. Mr. Sadat said Baghdad approached him for assistance through a third party and eventually sent an emissary to Cairo to sign the sales agreement. This was the first official confirmation of persistent rumors that Egypt was helping to arm Iraq. Only three days ago senior officials denied a U.S. television report that Cairo had sold 4,000 tons of ammunition, missiles and spare parts to Iraq. Mr. Sadat said he had told Iraq it could buy whatever it needed from Egypt's munitions factories because Baghdad had aided Cairo with free arms supplies in the past. He recalled that Iraq committed troops to the Arab side in the 1973 Middle East war and sent Soviet-made missiles to Egypt after the Soviet Union imposed an arms embargo on Cairo in 1974. 'Egypt does not forget loyalty,' the President said. He added, however, that Egypt still condemned Iraq for starting the conflict and it was wrong for two Islamic nations to be at war. Egypt's arms industry, once funded by other Arab states, produces ammunition, spare parts and missile fuel for Soviet weapons still in service with the Egyptian army. According to one Western diplomat: 'President Sadat clearly felt public disclosure would help Egypt's standing in the Arab world. That an economically powerful state like Iraq should overlook the past and come to Cairo for help cannot harm Egypt's standing in the region.' Earlier this month Sudan restored full diplomatic relations with Cairo and the Egyptian press has given prominence to calls by Sudanese President Jaafar Numeiri for other Arab league states to mend relations with Cairo. Western experts said it was not capable of producing weapons of the quality or quantity that could have a big impact on the Persian Gulf war. "One of the puzzles is why Iraq has come to Cairo for apparently small purchases," one Western diplomat said.

On May 3, 1982, with a new Iranian offensive threatening Iraq, Egypt is dropping almost all pretense of neutrality and ever more openly siding with Iraq. Egyptian Minister of Defense Abdul Halim Abu Ghazala last week affirmed Egypt is providing Iraq directly with certain types of weapons and ammunition. The defense minister repeated a relatively new theme of the government of Hosni Mubarak: that Egypt is ''committed to play a role in the Gulf area.'' General Abu Ghazala stopped short of openly siding with Iraq in its 19-month-old war with Iran, but Gulf security is a code term referring to the threat of the fundamentalist Shiite regime in Iran to the Arab countries of the Gulf that have large Shiite populations. Those are, primarily, Iraq, Bahrain, and Saudi Arabia. If the regimes in Iraq and other Gulf states survive the Iranian challenge-and if Egypt can take some of the credit-this is likely to speed up the reintegration of Egypt into the Arab world.

The return of Egypt (to the Arabs) "is our most cherished hope now," stated Iraqi first deputy prime minister Taha Yassin Ramadhan in his interview with the Egyptian weekly "al Mussawar" on June 10, 1983. Ramadhan pointed out, "Egypt needs the Arab nations and vice versa. Both the Arabs and Egypt have to seek to reunite." He said "Egypt has to proceed to the Arab nation and the Arab nation has to render it easy for the Egyptian government and people to do so." In the interview, he said that meetings between Iraq and Egypt would take place unconditionally and that Iraq was on its way to develop relations with Egypt. Iraq and Egypt differed on Middle East issues. In December 1977, the "steadfastness" countries held an Arab summit in Tripoli against then Egyptian president Sadat's visit to Jerusalem. Egypt severed diplomatic relations with Iraq and other countries participating in the summit. In January 1978, Egypt and Iraq resumed commercial relations. Henceforth, the two countries strengthened cooperation on many fields. Egypt supported Iraq on some regional issues.

Kamal Hasan Ali has described his meeting on March 28, 1984 with President Saddam Husayn as an important meeting which showed the extent of agreement between Egypt and Iraq on current problems in the Arab homeland, which threaten the security and stability of the area as a whole. At a news conference he held today at the end of his visit to Iraq, Ali said that President Saddam Husayn had given him a verbal message to President Husni Mubarak in reply to the Egyptian President's written message which he conveyed to the Iraqi President at their meeting today. Ali added that President Mubarak's message to the Iraqi President had dealt with the efforts which Egypt was exerting to end the Iraq-Iran war, whether through the non-aligned movement, the Islamic Conference, the United Nations or through various inter-national and regional organisations. At the start of his news conference, Ali spoke about the outcome of his visit to Iraq and said that it was an opportunity for further consultations between the two countries on various subjects of common interest, such as the Iraq-Iran war and the situation in the Arab homeland. He added that the visit had contributed to further co-operation between Egypt and Iraq in various fields to the benefit of the two fraternal peoples. It had been agreed to exchange visits between senior officials in Iraq and Egypt and the appropriate Ministers. He noted in this connection that he had invited Tariq Aziz, Iraq's Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister, to visit Egypt, and had also invited the Iraqi Minister of Agriculture to increase co-operation between the two countries. Ali said that an Iraqi Under-Secretary in Labour Ministry would visit Egypt on 15th April to draw up the bases for organising and coordinating Egyptian manpower in Iraq to ensure all the rights of Egyptian workers and to transfer their savings. He noted in this respect an Iraqi economic delegation's recent visit to Egypt, during which it had been agreed to exchange trade between the two countries to the amount of 15,000,000 dollars-the value of Egyptian contracts with Iraq.In answer to a question about whether Egypt would play a new role in the coming days in the light of its current consultations with Iraq on ending the Gulf war, Ali said: In exert-ing efforts to end this war Egypt is not carrying out a new role but is renewing its role. He added: Ever since the Iraq-Iran war broke out and because Iraq has shown goodwill about ending this war, Egypt has been contributing [its efforts to end the war] with various international organisations, whether through the non-aligned summit, the United Nations, the Security Council, or through intensive international contacts which Egypt has made and which it will make in the coming period. Egypt will always call for an end to the fighting and the bloodbath, which has no justification. Ali stressed that Egypt stands by Iraq fully and Egypt will not hesitate to respond to Iraq's request for military support. He added: Iraq has the manpower to enable it to repel any Iranian offensive. He noted that previous and current battles had shown that Iraq was capable of that. Ali was answering a question about his view on the positions of Syria and Libya regarding the Iraq-Iran war, the silent stance of some Arab states and whether Egypt was contemplating supporting Iraq militarily. Asked for his opinion on future moves on the Palestinian issue and whether the Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat's visit [to Cairo] had moved the Palestinian issue towards a peaceful solution, and what efforts Egypt was making to achieve such a solution, Kamal Hasan Ali replied: Before and after Arafat's visit to Cairo, Egypt supported a Palestinian-Jordanian dialogue in order to reach a formula for having the Palestinians represented in any future negotiations leading to a peaceful solution. He emphasized in that respect that Egypt had encouraged Jordan and the Palestinians to reach such an agreement. Asked for his opinion about Israel's continuing intransigence, Kamal Hasan Ali said: Egypt always advocates and calls on Israel to adopt positive stances and it also encourages moderation, starting with its request that Israel cease its practices in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip and that it also halt the construction of settlements, which contravenes the letter and spirit of the Camp David accord as well as all other initiatives made by the international community in various forums. In reply to a question as to whether there was anything new in Egyptian-Iraqi relations at the diplomatic level following his visit, Kamal Husan Ali said: As I have already said, discussions and an exchange of viewpoints between Egypt and Iraq are continuing on all the problems that concern the two countries, foremost of which is the Iraq-Iran war, as well as on all the problems related to the Arab homeland as a whole and Arab solidarity. Addressing his questioner, Kamal Hasan Ali said: Perhaps you refer in this respect to Arab solidarity in particular. At his news conference, Kamal Hasan Ali also replied to a question on relations between Egypt and the Arab countries by saying: Egyptian-Arab relations are always developing to the extent that the Arab countries desire. He added: On this basis, our relations have strengthened with many Arab countries that had adopted positions against Egypt in the past. Asked if Egypt was thinking of abrogating the Camp David accord, the Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister replied: This is completely untrue. Egypt adheres to its international commitments and to everything it has signed, whether on a bilateral or any other level. This accord is one such agreement and there is no reason to abrogate it. He added: The Camp David accord is the only thing that binds Israel legally to the peace process and to proceeding towards a peaceful solution without annexing territories; it also consecrates UN Resolutions 242 and 338 and has made the Palestinian issue an issue of a people and not an issue of refugees. That is why Egypt adheres to this accord. A Moroccan journalist asked Ali to explain why some Arab countries were calling persistently for Egypt's return [to the Arab fold] while they had not taken steps in that connection. Ali told the journalist that he should address that question to the Arab countries and not to Egypt. Asked how he viewed Egypt's return to the Arab ranks, Ali said: We see Egypt's return to the Arab ranks as something positive for the Arab cause, which it has not abandoned under any circumstances. He added: We will continue to work for the Arab cause without pause, with a pan-Arab concept, and within the context of real pan-Arab interests. This was proved by the fact that when the Iraq-Iran war broke out, Egypt's position was a pan-Arab one. Concerning Egypt's contacts with the non-aligned movement to end the Gulf war, Ali explained that Egypt's efforts through the non-aligned movement to end the war would be intensified. He expressed hope that positive results would be achieved in that connection. A journalist asked Ali about the new threat to security in the Nile Valley represented by the air raid on Omdurman, and whether that threat would affect Egypt's role vis-a-vis the Iraq-Iran war [as received]. Ali said: There are indisputable points. Egypt is the strategic backyard of Sudan and Sudan is the strategic backyard of Egypt. Whoever tries to interfere in Sudan's domestic affairs or to undermine its security and stability must face the two countries together-Egypt and Sudan. This is not only because we are two countries but one people, but also because there is a joint defence pact which is put into implementation when necessary. The recent event in Omdurman proved that Egypt is serious about this. In a statement to Egyptian journalists on the outcome of the diplomatic conference he held with [Egyptian] ambassadors and heads of diplomatic missions in the Gulf region, Ali said that he had listened to comprehensive reports from the diplomats regarding the area and on the Iraq-Iran war, as well as on the Palestinian and Lebanese problems, in order to make a full appraisal of Egypt's activity and to reassess the attitude of those countries towards what was happening in the area. He added that he had also discussed questions pertaining to the Egyptians working in those countries and the assistance that the Egyptian missions could give them.

On October 12, 1984, Egyptian President Mubarak is likely to follow up his highly publicized talks with King Hussein in Jordan with an early visit to Baghdad, despite the absence of diplomatic ties between Egypt and Iraq. Like most other Arab countries, both Jordan and Iraq broke off official links with Egypt in 1979 when the late President Sadat signed a peace treaty with Israel. Although King Hussein officially restored diplomatic relations two weeks ago, the Iraqi Government has not so far followed suit. But on his return from the Jordanian seaport of Aqaba yesterday, President Mubarak said there was nothing to stop him going to Baghdad 'at any time'. Egypt has supported Iraq in its war against Iran by supplying arms, spare parts, and ammunition, for the Iraqi armed forces. Egyptians who have gone to Iraq to find work have also joined the Iraqi 'People's Army' made up of 15 infantry brigades. Egyptian workers in Iraq are estimated at one million. A visit to Cairo in July 1983 by the Iraqi Foreign Minister, Mr Tareq Aziz, resulted in a five-part agreement between the two countries providing for economic and technical cooperation, the restoration of mutual banking facilities, an increase in the numbers of diplomats in the two capitals, and the setting-up of a committee to look after the interests of the Egyptian workers in Iraq. Egypt has recently given Iraq some fairly obvious hints that the Government in Baghdad should follow Jordan's example in making existing ties official, a move which President Mubarak would clearly like to happen before his trip takes place. The President's meetings with King Hussein have beer hailed in Cairo as a breakthrough in ending Egypt's comparative isolation from the rest of the Arab world. The semi-official newspaper, Al-Akhbar, yesterday prominently reported King Hussein's remarks that 'the Arab position has been collapsing because of in-fighting, divisions, and splits.' On his arrival back in Cairo, President Mubarak side-stepped the question whether Jordan and Egypt had settled their differences over the Camp David agreements and the peace treaty with Israel, which King Hussein still opposes. 'Camp David is our affair,' said the Egyptian leader.

The surprise visit to Iraq on March 19, 1985, by Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak and Jordan's King Hussein could signal the birth of a tripartite political alliance that occupies a middle position between Arab radicals and conservatives. The visit was aimed partly at demonstrating support by Jordan and Egypt, the Arab world's biggest country, for Iraq at a critical juncture in its bitter 4-year-old war with Iran. It also led to speculation that Iraq was about to resume diplomatic relations with Egypt. Mubarak and Iraqi President Saddam Hussein sidestepped that issue for the moment by saying Egyptian-Iraqi friendship was strong and did not require a formal exchange of ambassadors. Although Egyptian officials insist they oppose the establishment of an Arab axis, political analysts said the features of a bloc grouping Egypt, Iraq and Jordan are taking shape. Such a bloc would occupy a middle place in the political ground between the radical camp led by Syria and Libya and the Gulf conservatives under Saudi Arabian leadership. Iraq and Jordan were among 17 Arab countries that broke off diplomatic relations with Egypt in 1979 to protest its peace treaty with Israel. Jordan ended the boycott last September, resuming ties with Cairo. Despite the lack of diplomatic ties, Egypt has provided Iraq with volunteers and nearly $1 billion in weapons, equipment and spare parts for its war with Iran. Iraq and Jordan also are the only Arab countries open to Egyptians without an entry visa. Thousands of Egyptians work in Iraq, providing it with a vital labor force and sending to Egypt badly needed hard currency. In addition, the three countries are bound by ambitious agreements on economic and commercial cooperation. Politically, the three share cool sentiments-approaching animosity in Iraq's case-to the radical government in Syria. Syria has aligned itself with Iran in the Persian Gulf war and has tried to torpedo the Egyptian-Jordanian peace initiative. Syria also is blamed for many acts of terrorism in Jordan, although there has been no direct proof linking Damascus. Egypt and Jordan appear confident that in return for backing Iraq in the gulf war they have its support-albeit muted-for efforts to arrange an Arab-Israeli peace settlement. Egypt and Jordan closely coordinate policies and have called for the inclusion of the Palestine Liberation Organization in U.S.-sponsored peace efforts. Egypt played a key role in arranging the restoration of U.S.-Iraqi diplomatic relations last fall after a 17-year rupture. At the time, Egyptian officials appeared confident Iraq also would resume relations with Cairo. It has not-yet. The latest word from Baghdad is that Iraq prefers a collective Arab decision on the matter. But if an Arab summit is not held in the near future, Baghdad will take the step unilaterally, diplomatic sources said.

Iraq, which led the Arab boycott of Egypt nearly a decade ago, restored diplomatic relations on November 13, 1987. The announcement was made simultaneously in the two capitals, Baghdad and Cairo. Iraq and most other Arab countries broke with Egypt right it made peace with Israel early in 1979. Turkey has handled Egyptian interests in Baghdad and Yugoslavia represented Iraq in Cairo. Iraq's Foreign Ministry said renewal of ties was effective and that ambassadors will be exchanged immediately. A statement by the Egyptian Foreign Ministry said: "Out of belief in developing Arab relations, and maintaining national security, both governments have agreed to restore relations completely as of today." Cairo's membership in the Arab League has been suspended since the signing of the peace treaty. Iraq said that it acted "in accordance with the Arab nation's principles and the safeguarding of pan-Arab security and high pan-Arab interests." Resumption of ties "emanated from the profound relations linking the two countries ... their will to further consolidate these relations and their belief in setting up inter-Arab ties on the basis of Arab solidarity and close cooperation," it said. Egypt is the most populous and militarily powerful Arab nation. Its population of 50 million is the only match in the Arab world for the 55 million people in non-Arab Iran. Iran, which is Moslem but Persian, has been at war with Iraq since September 1980. After the late President Anwar Sadat of Egypt began the peace process with Israel, Iraq invited Arab leaders to a 1978 summit in Baghdad that told Egypt it would be ostracized if it made peace with the Jewish state. Iraq and all the 20 other Arab League members except Somalia, Sudan and Oman broke relations on March 23, 1979, the day after Sadat signed the first peace treaty between an Arab state and Israel. Relations between Iraq and Egypt began to improve soon after the Iran-Iraq war began. A suspension of arms shipment to Iraq in 1981 by its main supplier, the Soviet Union, forced Baghdad to purchase materiel from Egypt. After Soviet shipments resumed, Baghdad continued to receive arms from Egypt. Some estimates put the total value as high as $2 billion. More than 1 million Egyptians live in Iraq. They bolster a work force depleted by military needs and 350,000 of the Egyptians serve in the Iraqi Popular Army, a paramilitary militia that fights beside regular troops.

Egyptian Deputy Premier and Defense Minister Abdel Halim Abu Ghazala reaffirmed on April 23, 1988, Egypt's support to Iraq in the Iraq-Iran war. Asked by reporters if Egypt would be interfering in the gulf war in case the situation evolves in a way unfavourable to Iraq, Abu Ghazala said that Egypt considers that Egypt's security and the gulf security are part and parcel of the Arab national security and what adversely affects the gulf countries affects Egypt also.

President Saddam Hussein of Iraq made a surprise visit to Egypt on November 28, 1988-his first to this Arab state since taking office nine years ago-for talks with President Hosni Mubarak on Palestinian problems. Hussein told reporters at Cairo International Airport the visit was to discuss "all matters of common concern to the two countries and the Arab world in political, economic and other fields," with top priority going to the Palestinian question, according to the Middle East News Agency. "This is only natural," he said, in light of the U.S. refusal to issue an entry visa to allow Palestine Liberation Organization chief Yasser Arafat to address the U.N. General Assembly. Egypt and Iraq protested the action and announced Sunday that their foreign ministers had canceled plans to go to New York for the debate on Palestinian issues set to open Dec. 1. After meeting Hussein for lunch, Mubarak told reporters they exchanged views on a number of issues including the Iran-Iraq peace talks and the situation in the implications to the Arab region of the U.S. rejection of Arafat. The Middle East News Agency quoted Mubarak as saying Egypt was "very sorry" about the American position. The Palestine National Council, the PLO's parliament-in-exile, this month proclaimed an independent Palestinian state in Israeli-occupied lands. It also endorsed a U.N. resolution indirectly recognizing Israel. "We should support these decisions with everything in our power ... to help the struggling Palestinian people regain their land and establish an independent state," Hussein told reporters. He was greeted at the airport by Prime Minister Atef Sedki and met Mubarak in the airport's lounge before driving to the presidential palace, where they talked. Mubarak has visited Baghdad, the capital of Iraq, three times in the past two years. Iraq severed diplomatic ties with Egypt in 1979 to protest its peace treaty with Israel and resumed diplomatic relations in November 1987. Despite the diplomatic break, Egypt supplied Iraq with nearly $$2 billion in arms during Iraq's 8-year war with Iran. A U.N.-negotiated cease-fire went into effect Aug. 20, 1988.

Even as two old adversaries, Egypt and Syria, are being reunited, ties between two old friends, Egypt and Iraq, are being tested, it was announced on January 17, 1990. Through the decade of the 1980s, the two Mideast giants found common cause in adversity. Egypt provided Iraq with the money, manpower, material, and moral support needed to defeat Iran in the Gulf war. Iraq provided Egypt with an entree back into the Arab world after a decade of isolation following its 1979 peace treaty with Israel. But as Iraq and Egypt emerge from a decade of crisis and isolation, small strains are beginning to reappear. They presage an era of greater normalcy in relations between two states that, by virtue of size, population, and resources, remain inevitable competitors for regional leadership in the Middle East. The most serious recent irritant between Cairo and Baghdad also illustrates the extent to which Iraq's Saddam Hussein and Egypt's Hosni Mubarak, against mounting odds, have striven to keep relations on an even keel. In recent months, thousands of Egyptian workers-among the more than 1 million who migrated to Iraq to fill jobs vacated during the Gulf war-have been subjected to discrimination and intimidation as discharged Iraqi soldiers muscled their way back into the peacetime economy. Despite cries of outrage in Egypt, President Mubarak downplayed the provocations, while President Hussein swiftly eased the crisis with the first installments of up to $370 million in overdue remittances to returned workers. But other differences remain. Responding partly to pressure from the United States, Egypt recently backed out of a joint project with Iraq and Argentina to develop a medium-range missile, the Condor II, leaving the future of the project in doubt. The two countries have also been at odds over Lebanon, where Iraq has provided moral and military support to Christian forces fighting Syria, Iraq's main Arab rival. Egypt recently declined to support an Iraqi call for a special Arab League summit. Iraq wanted a summit to condemn Syria for its failure to withdraw its forces from Lebanon in accordance with a proposed six-month Arab League timetable. Egypt and Iraq also differed in their response to the Taif accord-agreed upon in Saudi Arabia in October 1989. The accord sanctions a short-term Syrian military presence in Lebanon, calling for withdrawal of its troops to the Bekaa Valley over a two-year period. Egypt and Iraq even have conflicting visions of the four-nation Arab Cooperation Council (ACC) they helped to create last year to coordinate economic policies with Jordan and North Yemen. Both countries see the ACC as a force for political moderation in the region, but Iraq also backs the ACC as a means of isolating Syria and Saudi Arabia. Iraq has not reacted publicly to news of the restoration of ties between Egypt and Syria. But officials here are said to have been caught by surprise by the speed of the rapprochement, which has undermined Baghdad's strategy of keeping Syria isolated in the Arab world. ''In effect, Iraq is saying, 'We're delighted' through gritted teeth,'' says a Western diplomat in Baghdad of Iraq's diplomatic silence. But Iraqi officials say major differences between Egypt and Syria will blunt the impact of last month's announcement, while relations between Cairo and Baghdad remain essentially sound. Despite tactical differences, both Iraq and Egypt oppose Syria's involvement in Lebanon, and both have disapproved of Syria's reluctance to back peace moves by Palestine Liberation Organization chairman Yasser Arafat. ''The restoration of diplomatic ties will not lead to an alignment of views between Cairo and Damascus,'' says a senior Iraqi official.

19900811-20001106 RIV1220-0.25

For MID3957 (8/11/1990 to 03/03/1991), this dispute revolves around the post-Persian Gulf War settlements and the violation of the no fly zone by Iraq resulting in clashes between Iraqi and U.S. and British jets. 

Egypt was not directly involved in these clashes but fully supported the United States and other coalition member's framework for dealing with post war Iraq. Specific issues relating to Egypt revolve around Iraq's bellicose and anti-American tone throughout this period and Egypt's continued support for U.S. policy. In some unrelated issues: Iraq at the time was suspicious of Israel and felt that Israel was preparing to launch a preemptive strike against Baghdad, which Egypt opposed. Finally, issues relating to Israel and U.S. support of Israel were another source of contention between Egypt and Iraq, Egypt again attempting to curb Iraq's bellicose and anti-American oratory. 

MID4273 involved Egypt on October 22, 1999. The MID occurred because of increasing intransigence by Iraq. Iraq increased the frequency with which it violated the no-fly zones and threatened to refuse to allow Americans on the UN inspections team.

The last MID of RIV1220, MID4273 ended on October 22, 1999. On July 15, 2000, it was reported that trade between Egypt and Iraq-America's No. 1 ally and No. 1 enemy in the Arab world-has expanded dramatically in recent years, prompting some analysts to question the effectiveness of the U.N. embargo against Baghdad. To some, the development reflects discontent in Cairo with U.S. policy in the region, while others dismiss it as an attempt by Egypt to develop lucrative commercial ties apart from its security commitments with Washington. "The trade development that Egypt shares with Iraq is a consequence of the lack of confidence that Egypt has in U.S. policies towards Iraq and the country's halfhearted attempt at overthrowing Saddam Hussein," said David Wurmser, a research fellow at the American Enterprise Institute who specializes in Middle East affairs.

20001107-20159999 0.5

Iraq broke off diplomatic ties with Egypt after Cairo in the Gulf War joined the US-led force opposing Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, which brought on the sanctions. On November 7, 2000, Iraq and Egypt announced the effective resumption of diplomatic relations. Egypt has become one of Iraq's major economic partners since 1996, when the United Nations started authorizing Iraq to export oil for food, medicine and other necessities. Cairo has regularly called for an end to the economic sanctions on Iraq. Iraq's second in command, Ezzat Ibrahim, travelled to Cairo in October 2000 but it was to represent his country at the emergency Arab summit designed to support the Palestinians. He met Egypt's President Hosni Mubarak on the summit sidelines.

Egypt will soon sign an agreement with sanctions-hit Iraq on setting up a free trade zone as part of the efforts to build an inter-Arab common market, Egypt's leading Al Ahram reported on December 9, 2000. Egyptian Prime Minister Atef Obeid was quoted as saying that Egypt is keen to boost Egyptian-Arab relations at the economic level and expects to sign the accord with Iraq in Cairo "shortly." He did not give details about the deal, but sources said that Egypt, Iraq and Libya intended to establish a tripartite free trade zone. Obeid said that Egypt will put forward a full-scale project for removing tariffs in the field of service with Arab countries at the next Arab summit, scheduled to be held in Amman, Jordan, in March. The premier said that a new company, named "Al Shark Gas Company," will be formed soon to build a pipeline for exporting natural gas from Egypt to Syria, Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey. The Arab world, aiming to set up a region-wide free trade zone by 2007, has been warming ties with Iraq in recent months with moves to boost trade and resume flights despite a decade of United Nations sanctions. Egypt and Iraq, who had operated interests sections in the Indian Embassy in each other's capital since they broke ties after Egypt joined the U.S.-led multi-national force in 1991 to end Iraq's occupation of Kuwait, upgraded their diplomatic missions last month to the level of charge d'affaires. Since the U.N. allowed Iraq to sell oil in exchange for humanitarian goods in 1996, Egypt has become Iraq's top supplier. It expected to export 1.2 billion U.S. dollars worth of goods to Iraq in 2000, up from 400 million dollars in 1999. On December 13, 2000, Egypt has decided to operate a weekly regular flight between Cairo and Baghdad after the current Muslim holy month of Ramadan, Egypt's Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) said. The flights, which will be run by EgyptAir, Egypt's national carrier, is to become the first service between the two Arab capitals since Iraq's 1990 invasion of Kuwait, Egypt's Middle East News Agency reported. Egypt has received a one-year permission from Jordan for Egyptian planes to fly to and from Iraq via the kingdom's airspace, CAA officials said. They added that Egypt was contacting the United Nations Sanctions Committee for approval. The committee's permission has been insisted by the United States and Britain, which enforced two no-fly zones in Iraq after the 1991 Gulf War driving Iraqi troops out of Kuwait, as necessary for any flights to and from Iraq. But the CAA officials said their step follows a number of countries, which have already operated flights to Baghdad, because the U.N. Security Council resolutions related to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait do not prohibit civil flights to the Iraqi capital. Egypt and Iraq, which cut off diplomatic relations in 1991 after Egypt joined the Gulf War, restored the ties in November 2000. The two countries have been making efforts to expand trade. Since the U.N. allowed Iraq to sell oil to buy humanitarian goods in 1996, Egypt has become one of the largest exporters to Iraq in the world.

Vice President Taha Yassin Ramadan will sign a deal in Cairo on January 14, 2001, for an Iraqi-Egyptian free trade zone, on the highest Iraqi official visit to Egypt since the 1991 Gulf war, Iraqi diplomats said. Ramadan travelled to Cairo in October but it was to represent his sanctions-hit country at the emergency Arab summit designed to support the Palestinians. He met with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak on the summit sidelines and was expected to meet him again for official talks. Egyptian government newspapers reported in December that Iraq would sign a deal here soon to set up a free trade zone with Egypt as part of wider moves toward removing tariffs in the Arab world. Arab League sources said recently that Egypt, Iraq and Libya intended to set up a trilateral free trade zone. The Arab world, which has plans to set up a region-wide free trade zone by 2007, has been warming to Iraq increasingly in recent months with moves to boost trade and resume flights despite a decade of United Nations sanctions. Egypt, the top supplier of sanctions-hit Baghdad under the UN oil-for-food program, is expected to export 1.2 billion dollars of goods to Iraq in 2000, up from 400 million dollars in 1999, Egyptian ministers have said. Iraq broke off diplomatic ties with Egypt after Cairo joined the US-led force opposing Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, which brought on the sanctions. On November 7, Iraq and Egypt announced the effective resumption of relations. Egypt has become one of Iraq's major economic partners since 1996, when the UN started letting Iraq sell limited amounts of oil for food, medicine and other necessities. Cairo has regularly called for an end to the economic sanctions on Iraq.

Iraq has asked Egypt to act as its mediator with Kuwait and Saudi Arabia to end their disputes remaining from Iraq's 1990 invasion of Kuwait, Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak said on February 7, 2001. "During my meeting on January 17 in Cairo with Iraqi Vice President Taha Yassin Ramadan, I understood that Iraq is asking for Egypt's help and intervention to heal (Baghdad's) relations with brothers Saudi Arabia and Kuwait," Mubarak was quoted by Egypt's MENA news agency as saying. "I spoke very frankly with him and told him that the declarations coming out of Baghdad are not helping," Mubarak added, speaking to Egyptian press editors on his return journey from a visit to Kuwait. Iraqi President Saddam Hussein's son Uday, a member of Iraq's parliament, described Kuwait last month as an "integral part of Greater Iraq." Mubarak said he had felt that Kuwait was concerned that Egypt's recent free trade agreement with Iraq would change its policies, but vowed that Egypt "does not change its principles for one reason or another." Egypt took part in the US-led coalition of international forces that evicted Iraqi troops from Kuwait in 1991. Cairo's trade relations with Baghdad have boomed over the past two years, with Egyptian exports to Iraq worth 1.2 billion dollars in 2000 and expected to reach two billion dollars, or a third of its total exports, in 2001, according to Economy Minister Yussef Butros Ghali. But a visit by Ghali and a delegation of businessmen to Baghdad scheduled for Friday has been put off for around 10 days "so it can be better prepared," Ghali was quoted by MENA as saying. Egypt's relations with Iraq, broken off by Baghdad in 1991 during the Gulf War, were restored to the level of charge d'affaires with rank of ambassador in November 2000.

Egypt has made all efforts to prevent a US-led war on Iraq, Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak said in Cairo on March 17, 2003, in an apparent acknowledgment that little can be done to prevent the conflict. "Egypt has done its part in trying to save the region from the dangers of war," Mubarak said, quoted by Information Minister Safwat al-Sherif after a meeting of senior officials to discuss the Iraq crisis. "Egypt has deployed all efforts in order to spare the Iraqi people from the dangers of such a war," Mubarak added, in the first Egyptian comment on the Iraq crisis since the US-British-Spanish summit in the Azores. "It played its role in organizing an Arab summit and in offering constant advice to the Iraqi regime on the steps to be taken to save itself and its people," Mubarak added, referring to the Arab summit in Egypt on March 1, 2003. He did not refer directly to the Azores meeting in which US President George W. Bush gave the United Nations a 24-hour ultimatum to back a war on Iraq. Public opinion in Egypt is highly mobilized against the United States in its standoff with Iraq, but so far large demonstrations have been tightly monitored by authorities. Sherif said Mubarak had ordered the set up a committee of ministers to deal with the possible repercussions in Egypt of any war in Iraq. It's likely tasks will be to monitor the security situation, civil aviation issues, and the situation of Egyptian expatriates in Iraq and neighboring Arab countries. Egypt announced last week a plan to evacuate its nationals from Iraq and other Gulf states should a war break out. Some 923,600 Egyptians work in Saudi Arabia. Smaller numbers work in Bahrain, Iraq, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates. Egypt's national airline EgyptAir announced last week that flights to some destinations would be rerouted to avoid dangerous skies during a possible war. Officials here have estimated that a war could cost Egypt between six and eight billion dollars in lost revenues, mainly from the vital tourism and export sectors.

After the US-led invasion the relations between Iraq and Egypt kept at the same level of good relations and even improved on certain issues. 

On July 24, 2004, hours after Iraq's interim prime minister left Cairo with a pledge from reluctant Egypt to help his government secure Iraq, Iraqi insurgents put the Egyptian government on notice it had gone too far by kidnapping one of its diplomats. Arab countries wanting to help Iyad Allawi's interim government restore peace and stability in Iraq tread a delicate path, and thus far have provided half-measures to keep themselves from becoming targets. Even so, Egypt apparently went a step too far. When Iraq asked for Egyptian troops to protect a U.N. mission expected to supervise elections next year, Egypt instead offered to train Iraqi police and security personnel in Egypt and to consider sending some soldiers to Iraq once the chaotic country calms down. Militants calling themselves the Lions of Allah Brigade promptly responded by abducting Egyptian diplomat Mohammed Mamdouh Helmi Qutb as he left a Baghdad mosque Friday and demanded Egypt drop any intention of providing security help. Allawi urged Egypt not to give in to the kidnappers demands, but Egyptian analysts were mixed on whether the pressure tactic would work. "I think the government has to think about its next move one, twice and three times now before giving any security support to Allawi's government,' said Abdel Halim Qandil, editor of the Nasserite newspaper Al-Arabi. The Egyptian government has said little about its intentions since Qutb was snatched, with Foreign Minister Ahmed Aboul Gheit noting Saturday that "it is a very sensitive situation." "We will not abandon Egyptian citizens in that way," Aboul Gheit told reporters of Qutb and Mohammed Sanad, an Egyptian truck driver kidnapped Wednesday. "I hope the kidnappers will show mercy," he added, saying that attempts to free the hostages are ongoing, but quietly. Allawi, addressing reporters during a visit to Syria, said it was "regrettable" the Philippines accepted kidnappers' demands, and urged Egypt not to. The Philippines withdrew its 51 peacekeepers from Iraq ahead of schedule, acquiescing to militants holding a Filipino truck driver. The hostage was released Tuesday. "It is time for us to close ranks to fight terrorism. There is no way to budge to terrorists and give them what they want," Allawi told a news conference in Damascus. On Thursday, the day before Qutb was abducted, presidential spokesman Magad Abdel Fattah told The Associated Press that Egypt was "willing to help" in Iraq, but that before committing troops it needed to see the Iraqis restore some calm themselves. Aboul Gheit said Friday shortly after Qutb's abduction that "sending troops or Egyptian military personnel to Iraq is not an issue on the table at all for Egypt." Mohammed Ibrahim Shakir, deputy head of the Egyptian Council on Foreign Relations, said he does not expect Egypt to give in to the kidnappers demands to change course on Iraq.

Egyptian Foreign Minister Ahmed Abul Gheit reiterated on August 4, 2004, that his country would not send troops to Iraq. "Egypt's position on sending forces to Iraq is clear. It rejects sending any forces there," Abul Gheit told reporters, in response to a Saudi proposal that Arab and Islamic forces replace the US-led coalition troops. "What has been brought up about sending Arab and Islamic forces is merely a proposal, which the United States and Arab parties are still looking at," he said. Egypt, which has offered to train Iraqi police officers in Egypt, has made it clear that it has no plan to send troops to Iraq. Saudi Foreign Minister Saud al-Faisal has recently floated a proposal on sending an Islamic peace-keeping force to Iraq to replace the coalition forces in Iraq.

Egypt is the first Arab nation to send an ambassador to post-Saddam Iraq, the Iraqi foreign minister was to announce on June 22, 2005, according to a copy of his speech obtained by The Associated Press. In an address to an international conference on Iraq held at the EU, Iraqi Foreign Minister Hoshyar Zebari praises Egypt for "showing regional leadership by taking the decision to appoint the first Arab ambassador we hope to soon welcome in the new Iraq," according to the text. Arab nations withdrew their ambassadors from Baghdad under Saddam Hussein. Some Arab nations, including Egypt, have diplomats in Baghdad, but none at the ambassador level-a source of irritation to Iraq's transitional government, which considered it less than full commitment to Iraq. Egypt sent a high-level diplomat to its mission in Baghdad last month, Iraqi officials said. Egypt is among Iraq's Mideast neighbors attending the conference hosted by the European Union and the United States on Iraq's future. Foreign ministers were expected to discuss normalizing diplomatic relations, as well as better border control, at the closed-door talks. Iraqi leaders said the security situation is improving and the government was making strides on stemming the insurgency, and encouraged countries to restore diplomatic relations with the new government in Baghdad.

Egypt and Iraq met on November 10, 2005, on preparations for a reconciliation conference between Iraq's ethnic and religious communities which has been promoted by the Arab League as a way to end Iraq's violent strife. "Reaching harmonious relations between Iraq's different groups is the principal objective so that security and stability can return to the country," Egyptian Foreign Affairs Minister Ahmed Abul Gheit said. He made the remarks during a meeting with visiting Iraqi National Security Advisor Muwaffaq al-Rubaie, Egypt's official MENA news agency said. The Arab League, which is headquartered in Cairo, has recently stepped-up its involvement in Iraq and is currently undertaking diplomatic efforts to organize a reconciliation conference of the country's Sunni, Shiite and Kurdish communities. Rubaie stressed that "Iraq's government, people and political and religious parties welcome the Arab League's initiative to which they are cooperating." The number two of Iraqi Prime Minister Ibrahim Jaafari's Dawa party said that preparatory meetings for the conference would be held on November 19 in Cairo. Answering reporters' questions after the meeting about recent killings of Arab diplomats in Iraq, including Egypt's own envoy in July, Rubaie said: "Iraq will provide increased security to diplomats." Turning to Syria, Rubaie reiterated previous calls by his government and Washington for Damascus to prevent cross-border infiltrations by insurgents. "We believe that the Syrian government could do much more to stop suicide bombers from crossing into Iraq and hence prevent bloodshed," he said. "My government does not mean to be hostile to Syria but we cannot allow for death to be imported to Iraq in this way," he said. The Iraqi envoy arrived in Egypt on Tuesday for a visit that is expected to last several days. He also met with Egypt's interior minister Habib al-Adly.

PS-SOURCES: New York Times October 13, 1948; August 26, 1949; February 10, 1950; October 23, 1951; September 18, 1954; January 28, 1955; June 23, 1955; July 28, 1963; August 21, 1970; December 7, 1977; Agence France Presse January 14, 2001; Februay 7, 2001; March 17, 2003; November 10, 2005; Xinhua April 1, 1979; April 8, 1979; June 10, 1983; April 23, 1988; December 9, 2000; December 13, 2000; August 5, 2004; Associated Press November 13, 1987; November 28, 1988; July 24, 2004; June 22, 2005; July 9, 2005; October 20, 2005; Washington Times July 15, 2000; BBC March 28, 1984; Christian Science Monitor May 3, 1982; January 19, 1990; Globe and Mail April 1, 1981; United Press International March 19, 1985; April 19, 1990; The Guardian October 12, 1984

MARITIME-MIDS:

MARITIME-DISPUTE:

Discussion:

SOURCES: Gibler, D.M. 2018. Militarized Interstate Dispute Narratives, 1816-2010. Langham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. 

Stephen Blackwell (1999) A desert squall: Anglo-American planning for military intervention in Iraq, July 1958-August 1959, Middle Eastern Studies, 35:3, 1-18, DOI: 10.1080/00263209908701276

