FILE: cm645652v11.0.txt
DYAD: IRAQ-SYRIA
RIVALRY: RIV1221
DISPUTE(S): MID607 
RIVALRY: RIV1222
DISPUTE(S): MID3176 MID3086 MID2786 MID3957 

RIVNOTES: 

PS: 19460417-19760605 0.5 19760606-20061210 0.25 20061211-20209999 0.5

PS-UPDATE2020:

PSNOTES: thompson rivalry cm645652 ,19460000 ,20100000 

PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20220321
PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20220321

Territorial-Maritime-Boundary Issues Variables

MID607

TERRMID: MID607 3 -- not territorial MID
TERRMID-CER: MID607 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: MID607 The issue that sparks the MID concerns Iraqi claims that Syria lied about sending arms to Syria. This is a non-territorial issue. The states do not dispute a border area (Huth and Allee 2002).

TERRLINK: MID607 1 -- third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID607 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID607 from Gibler 2018, the Baghdad Pact countries (Iraq, Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan) had a series of disputes with the Soviet-back countries of Syria and Egypt from 1956-1958. In 1956, Iraq warned Syria that it would use force to defend itself if Syria continued to (allegedly) lie about Iraq sending arms into Syria to foment unrest. The Baghdad pact members were also concerned about Soviet support for Syria. Also in 1956, Syria protested that Turkey was threatening to attack and amassing troops at the border with Syria. Jordan warned that aggression to Syria would be seen as aggression to Jordan. In 1957, the Baghdad Pact members and the Soviet-backed countries disputed the future of Jordan, as the Baghdad Pact countries feared that the Soviet Union, Egypt, and Syria were preparing to split Jordan amongst themselves. Iraq threatened force if Jordan was split. Turkey deployed troops to the border with Syria, and NATO countries conducted shows of force. Syrian and Turksih forces clashed on the border. Coded third party link to territorial MID because this was connected to a dispute over Jordan. 

MARITMID: MID607 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID607 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID607 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID607 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID607 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID607 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID607 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID607 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID607 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID607 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID607 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID607 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID3176

TERRMID: MID3176 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID3176 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID3176 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID3176 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID3176 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID3176 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID3176 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID3176 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID3176 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID3176 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID3176 1 -- civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID3176 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID3176 from Gibler 2018, Iraq was supporting militarized rebels in Lebanon, and Syria was opposing them. Tensions rose, and Iraq and Syria moved troops to the border. Coded civil war link because this was connected to militarized rebels in Lebanon, outside this dyad. 

COUPMID: MID3176 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID3176 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID3176 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID3176 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID3086

TERRMID: MID3086 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID3086 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID3086 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID3086 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID3086 coded third party link to territorial MID because this MID involves Iraq escalating tensions by breaking diplomatic ties while accusing Syria of supporting Iraq during the Iran-Iraq War. The Iran-Iraq War is a territorial dispute outside this dyad. See CIVWARMID-NOTES. 

MARITMID: MID3086 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID3086 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID3086 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID3086 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID3086 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID3086 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID3086 from cm narrative, MID3086 is a one day dispute involving only Iraq and Syria once again. Specifically, the dispute involves four Syrian violations of Iraqi airspace after Syria closed its border to Iraq and shut down the crude oil pipeline from Iraq. Iraq, at this time, was embroiled in a war with Iran, and Syria attempted to take advantage of Iraq's military problems with Iran. Again, the motivation seems to be Syria's concern that Iraq was trying to subvert the Syrian regime by backing opposition forces. Iraq cut off diplomatic ties with Syria, accusing Syria of helping Iran. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to Iraq supporting militarized rebels in Syria. 

CIVWARLINK: MID3086 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID3086 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID3086 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID3086 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID3086 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID3086 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID2786

TERRMID: MID2786 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID2786 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID2786 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID2786 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID2786 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID2786 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID2786 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID2786 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID2786 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID2786 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID2786 from cm narrative, MID2786 involves another violation of Iraqi airspace by a Syrian MiG-21. Iraq shot down the MiG, and the pilot survived. This appears to by an isolated incident; the Syrian pilot was on a training mission and flew into Iraqi space by mistake. Coded not civil war because the pilot mistakenly flew into Iraqi airspace. This was an isolated incident and did not obviously connect to tensions over other issues. 

CIVWARLINK: MID2786 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID2786 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID2786 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID2786 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID2786 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID2786 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID3957 

TERRMID: MID3957 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID3957 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID3957 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID3957 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID3957 from Gibler 2018, this is the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. Syria, as part of a coalition, expelled Iraq from Kuwait. Coded third party link to territorial dispute because the Gulf War was a territorial dispute between Iraq and Kuwait, and Syria became involved to expel Iraq from Kuwait. 

MARITMID: MID3957 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID3957 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID3957 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID3957 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID3957 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID3957 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID3957 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID3957 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID3957 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID3957 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID3957 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID3957 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID4527

TERRMID: MID4527 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID4527 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID4527 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID4527 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID4527 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID4527 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID4527 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4527 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4527 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4527 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID4527 from cm narrative, this MID is largely comprised of border skirmishes between Syrian troops and US/Iraqi border forces, as well as various border violations and shows of force by US forces hunting Iraqi terrorists in Syria. In April, 2005, US and Iraqi forces clashed with Syrian border troops, who were apparently attempting to provide covering fire for terrorists crossing the border into Iraq. Following this incident, the US stepped up its operations in Syrian territory, which resulted in both sides amassing troops at the Syrian-Iraqi border to stop crossings from either side. In July 2005, US and Iraqi forces again clashed with Syrian border troops briefly across the border, possibly mistaking the Syrian troops for terrorists. First day of dispute was on 4/22/2005 and last day of dispute was on 7/22/2005. Coded civil war link because this was connected to militarized rebels in Iraq and Syria, both within this dyad. 

CIVWARLINK: MID4527 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4527 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID4527 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4527 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4527 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4527 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID4 2002-2010:

MID4527
rivalry=645652 nationa=SYRIA nationb=IRAQ MID4527 20050422-20050722 
 revtype1a=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2a=NOT APPLICABLE fatala=NONE fatalpa=0 lhosta=USE OF FORCE 
 revtype1b=POLICY revtype2b=NOT APPLICABLE fatalb=NONE fatalpb=0 lhostb=
USE OF FORCE 

This MID is largely comprised of border skirmishes between Syrian troops and US/Iraqi border forces, and various border violations and shows of force by US forces hunting Iraqi terrorists in Syria. In April, 2005, US and Iraqi forces clashed with Syrian border troops who were apparently attempting to provide covering fire for terrorists crossing the border into Iraq. Following this incident, the US stepped up its operations in Syrian territory, which resulted in both sides massing troops at the Syrian-Iraqi border to stop crossings from either side. In July 2005, US and Iraqi forces again clashed with Syrian border troops briefly across the border, possibly mistaking the Syrian troops for terrorists. First day of dispute was on 4/22/2005 and last day of dispute was on 7/22/2005.

NARRATIVE-CM:
Britain and France referred a dispute concerning the Iraq-Syria border to the League of Nations (LON) Council on November 14, 1931. The LON Council established a commission of inquiry to investigate the border dispute. The LON Council approved the report of the LON commission of inquiry on November 25, 1932. Iraq and Syria signed a border delimitation agreement in Geneva on July 3, 1933. Iraqi troops and Syrian troops clashed near the border on August 4-5, 1933. Iraq referred the matter to the LON Council on August 5, 1933. The LON Council established a three-member commission of inquiry on August 31, 1933. Responding to a the crisis resulting from turmoil in Jordan, Iraqi king Faisal II and King Saud of Saudi Arabia met on May 11, 1957 to craft a joint effort to prevent increasing Syrian influence in Jordan. On September 26, 1970 Saudi Arabia moderated talks between Iraq and Syria to resolve issues of mutual concern regarding Syrian policy in the Middle East. The results of the talks were kept secret. Iraq accused Syria of diverting water from the Euphrates River, and referred the matter to the League of Arab States (LAS) on April 7, 1975. The LAS Council established a conciliation commission on April 22, 1975. Saudi Arabia attempted to mediate negotiations between the parties from April to June 3, 1975, when Syria agreed to release more water from the Tabqa reservoir. On June 13, 1976, Syria accused Iraq of mobilizing 8,000 troops and tanks along the border. On August 22, Syria arrested an group of Iraqi nationals blamed for bombing assassinations within Syria. Iraq closed the border with Syria on November 2, 1976. Iraqi troops and Syrian troops withdrew their troops from the border on November 25, 1976 as part of an agreement negotiated with the help of Egyptian Vice-President Husni Mubarak. On December 15, 1976 Iraq accused Syria of sponsoring an attempted assassination of Sadam Hussein, deputy chairman of the ruling Revolutionary Command Council in an airport bomb blast that killed 3 and injured 230. On March 7, 1982, Syria blamed Iraq and the United States for sponsoring a coup attempt in Syria during February. Syria closed down oil pipelines to Iraq on April 10, 1982, and severed diplomatic relations with Iraq on April 18, 1982. President Mikhail Gorbachev of the Soviet Union offered to mediate between Iraq and Syria on December 24, 1985. On April 2, 1990, Iraq announced that it had deployed binary chemical weapons in ballistic launchers and targeted these on Israel to deter future Israeli attacks on Iraq. It was also announced the same day that these missiles were based in permanent launchers placing Damascus, Syria within their effective range. On August 11, Syria announced that it would deploy troops to Saudi Arabia to join the coalition against Iraq. Troops began arriving on August 14, 1990. On August 11, 1990 Syria declared that it would not aid Iraq in the case of an Israeli attack against Iraqi targets.

SOURCES-CM:
Facts on File May 9-15, 1957, September 11, 1976, December 18, 1976, March 26, 1982, April 6, 1990, August 11, 1990; Keesing, August 18-24, 1975, June 4, 1982; Middle East Journal (MEJ), Spring 1986; Survey of International Affairs (SIA), 1931, 522, 1932, 603, 1933, 592.

NARRATIVE-CR:
The Syrian-Iraq rivalry begins with MID607 and revolves around the Cold War politics of the time. The United States' Eisenhower Doctrine reflected U.S. fears of the growing `menace' of communist influence in the Middle East. Syria rejected the Eisenhower Doctrine and any external interference in Syrian politics. The United States viewed this as a sign that Syria was already falling under communist Soviet domination. The Eisenhower Doctrine was then aimed at isolating Syria's National Front Regime. Syria entered into a Soviet aid agreement in the Summer of 1957 and disclosed a plot by the United States to overthrow the regime. With the appointment of Afif Bizri to the Army Chief-of-Staff of the Syrian armed forces, the United States, because of Bizri's communist leanings, felt that a communist coup d'etat was underway. Turkey and Iraq, pro-Western at the time, amassed troops along the Syrian border along with the U.S. stationing the American Sixth Fleet off its shores and air lifting arms to Syria's neighbors to `protect them from Syrian attack.' Syria sought the help of Egypt and the USSR which warned that an attack against Syria could not remain `localized' and the USSR dispatched two destroyers to the region. Attempts by the United States, Saudi Arabia, and the U.N. attempted to mediate the growing tensions, but Syria refused. However, by November 7th, Turkish troops were withdrawn and the crisis seemed abated. 

MID3176 involves only Iraq and Syria. The issues involved in this dispute may be threefold. Syria was the most adamant in its stance towards Israel, often lending support to or trying to take control of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). In addition, Lebanon, divided by Christian (defenders of the established order) and Muslim (Palestinian) forces gave Syria means by which to increase its influence and prestige. As Syria became more involved in the Lebanese politics, the Iraqi regime felt that this threatened its own credibility and its role in the region as a strong Arab power. In late 1975, Syria started to become involved in Lebanon militarily and Iraq feared that Syria would gain control over the PLO. Adding to these tensions, in April of 1976, Iraq discontinued its use of the trans-Syrian oil pipeline in an attempt to cause economic harm to Syria and to protest its involvement in Lebanon. Finally, both sides accused the other of attempting to subvert the government of the other, this involved Ba'th party politics. Each side used these disputes to increase their own Arab legitimacy, Iraq protesting Syria's involvement in Lebanon and Syria accusing Iraq of aiding Israel by cutting of needed funds from Syria. MID3176 more specifically involves the movement of Iraqi troops to the Syrian border on June 8th, 1976. They camped near the Syrian border until November. Iraq hoped to put pressure on Syria in regards to its policies regarding Lebanon. When Syrian forces entered Beirut in late November it became clear to Iraq that Syria could not be pressured and the troops were withdrawn. 

MID3086 is a one day dispute involving only Iraq and Syria once again. Specifically, the dispute involves four Syrian violations of Iraqi airspace after Syria closed its border to Iraq and shut down the crude oil pipeline from Iraq. Iraq at this time was embroiled in a war with Iran and Syria attempted to take advantage of Iraq's military problems with Iran. Again, the motivation seems to be Syria's concern that Iraq was trying to subvert the Syrian regime by backing opposition forces. Iraq cut of diplomatic ties with Syria, accusing Syria of helping Iran. 

MID2786 involves another violation of Iraqi airspace by a Syrian MiG-21, which was shot down by Iraqi forces, the pilot survived. This appears to by an isolated incident; the Syrian pilot was on a training mission and flew into Iraqi space by mistake.

MID3957 is the Persian Gulf War, started on August 2, 1990 with Iraq's invasion of Kuwait. The United Nations Security Council immediately passed Resolution 660 condemning the invasion. The Arab League, on August 3rd, also called for Iraq's immediate withdrawal. Syria joined the Arab coalition against Iraq and with the conclusion of hostilities on February 28th 1991 and the Security Council Resolution 686 on March 3rd, Syria's involvement in the dispute ended. 

On January 9, 1992, Syria said that the ouster of Iraqi President Saddam Hussein was now a necessity. "All the slogans of the (Iraqi) regime and the justification for its survival have fallen and its overthrow has become necessary," said the official Syrian newspaper Ath-Thawra. The comment came two days after the Syrian government newspaper Tishrin wrote that it would be "normal for the Iraqi people to rise up and do the impossible to get rid of this irresponsible and bloody regime." Iraqi officials too have joined the fray, with Hussein aide Abdel Jabbar Mohsen two weeks ago describing Syrian President Hafez al-Assad as "a dictator, who came to power in a military putsch." He was reacting to a decision by Syria to host a meeting of Iraqi government opponents living in exile. "We will cut off the heads of all the Syrian lackeys who harm Iraq," Hussein's son Odai warned in a commentary appearing in the Iraqi government paper Al-Jumhuriya. Ruled by rival wings of the Baath party and long at odds over leadership in the Arab world, Syria and Iraq had a serious falling out during the 1980-1988 Iran-Iraq war, during which Syria sided with Iran. In last year's Gulf conflict, Syria contributed 20,000 men and 300 armored vehicles to a U.S.-led military alliance that drove Iraqi troops out of Kuwait. Both countries are in principle committed to secular, pan-Arab socialism and both are ruled with an iron fist by representatives of minorities: Sunni Moslems in Iraq and Alawites-from another branch of Islam-in Syria. Syria has turned up the volume in its verbal tirade against Baghdad at a time when the Shiite component of Iraq's fractured opposition is trying to seize the initiative. One of the leading Shiite dissidents based in Tehran, Ayatollah Mohammad Baqr Hakim, travelled to Damascus at the end of last year to outline what he described as a plan to topple Hussein. Hakim, head of the Supreme Assembly of the Islamic Revolution in Iraq (SAIRI), failed to win the support of other opposition forces, although he reported that Assad had shown "understanding". But one dissident-who asked not to be named-said Syria had not been overly enthusiastic about Hakim's proposal, which he said had been "drawn up by Iran and Syria and sponsored by the United States and Britain". He added that Assad insists that "the fate of Iraq depends on the Iraqi people, who will determine an appropriate course of action, and not on foreign forces." Despite their hatred for Hussein, Assad and his government-who have cracked down hard on Sunni Islamic fundamentalists in the past-do not want to see Iraq dismembered and would have trouble accepting any takeover by Islamic militants. Iraqi leaders meanwhile shrug off talk of a coup d'etat by the opposition. "If they want to run the risk, let them try," commented Prime Minister Mohammad Hamza al-Zubaidi.

Overall, this does not seem to be one continuous rivalry. MID607 seems to revolve around Cold War politics and the rivalry between the United States and the Soviet Union. MID3176 and MID3086 are more connected in that it seems that Iraq and Syria were involved in attempts to subvert the other, gain greater influence in the region, and attempts to hurt each other economically by cutting of oil exports. MID2786 seems to be an isolated incident and MID3957 is the Persian Gulf War which involves Iraq's claim to Kuwait and subsequent invasion. 

SOURCES-CR: 
Petran (1972), Kienle (1990), Legum (1978), Facts on File: International and Financial Times London). 

PS-NARRATIVE: 

19460416-19760605 RIV1221-0.5 

On October 2, 1949, Iraq was trying to establish a union with Syria. These union intentions were not well perceived by other Arab states especially Saudi Arabia. On February 9, 1950, Iraq and Egypt signed a five years agreement to keep out of Syria's domestic affairs. On May 17, 1951, Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri as-Said announced that units of the Iraqi Guard with anti-aircraft guns and planes had moved into Syria to aid the Syrians against alleged Israeli aggression. On November 26, 1956, the tensions between Iraq and Syria increased. Iraq was unhappy with the Syrian-Soviet relations and the ongoing anti-Iraqi press propaganda in the Syrian media. Some sources said that they believed there was a high probability of Iraqi troops moving into Syria. MID607 started on April 13, 1957, and revolves around the Cold War politics of the time. The United States' Eisenhower Doctrine reflected U.S. fears of the growing `menace' of communist influence in the Middle East. Syria rejected the Eisenhower Doctrine and any external interference in Syrian politics. The United States viewed this as a sign that Syria was already falling under communist Soviet domination. The Eisenhower Doctrine was then aimed at isolating Syria's National Front Regime. Syria entered into a Soviet aid agreement in the summer of 1957 and disclosed a plot by the United States to overthrow its regime. With the appointment of Afif Bizri to the Army Chief-of-Staff of the Syrian armed forces, the United States, because of Bizri's communist leanings, felt that a communist coup d'etat was underway. Turkey and Iraq, pro-Western at the time, amassed troops along the Syrian border along with the U.S. stationing the American Sixth Fleet off its shores and air lifting arms to Syria's neighbors to `protect them from Syrian attack.' Syria sought the help of Egypt and the USSR which warned that an attack against Syria could not remain `localized' and the USSR dispatched two destroyers to the region. Attempts by the United States, Saudi Arabia, and the U.N. attempted to mediate the growing tensions, but Syria refused. On September 26, 1957, Iraq's prime minister made an official visit to Damascus in an attempt to bring the two countries together. Syria and Iraq have been part of different opposing alliances since 1955, when the Baghdad Pact was established. Syria leaned more toward Egypt and Soviet Union, while Iraq was a strong pro-Western ally during that period. However, by November 7th, Turkish troops were withdrawn and the crisis seemed abated. On March 15, 1959, a spokesman for the Syrian Army alleged that 30 Iraqis crossed the border illegally and attacked 2 Syrian guards. He said one of the guards was wounded near the village of Talhamar. On January 8, 1960, Iraq's Prime Minister vowed to help Syria militarily if necessary during its problems with Egypt as part of the United Arab Republic. On January 25, 1962, Syria and Iraq negotiated a defensive military cooperation. 

On September 2, 1963, Syria and Iraq agreed to `full economic unity' and closer military cooperation. They announced the plan at the end of a visit by Iraqi President Abdel Salam Arif. The alliance of Syria and Iraq was to become the nucleus for a proposed Baathist state to be known as the Arab Democratic People's Republic, according to decisions taken by the International Baathist Congress on October 24, 1963. On February 8, 1965, Syria and Iraq exchanged threats to overthrow each other as they marked the second anniversary of their joint revolution against Iraq's pro-Communist dictator, the late Abdul Karim Kasim. Leaders of Syria's Baath Party vowed at a Damascus rally to fight relentlessly until Iraq is returned to the Baath from President Abdul Salam Arif. Mr. Arif ended the partnership with the Baath Party of Iraq in November 1963. 

On February 17, 1967, Iraq's prime minister went to Damascus to negotiate a solution to the issue of oil transportation through Syria. Syria seized control of the trans-Syrian pipeline which brings oil from Iraq to the Mediterranean because Iraq did not agree to double the transit costs. No Iraqi Prime Minister had visited Damascus for a few years and this move was seen as a change in the relationships. 

On August 13, 1970, Syria and Iraq reaffirmed their opposition to the Egyptian plans to sign an agreement with Israel. On January 8, 1973, Syria and Iraq reached an agreement about the transit fees for Iraqi oil through the trans-Syrian pipeline to the Mediterranean. The negotiations lasted for the previous 6 months. On January 16, 1974 it was reported that Iraq kept trying to convince Hafez Al-Assad to create a Syrian-Iraqi alliance in the Middle East. On February 27, 1975 Syria was accused of helping Kurdish fighters against Iraq. On May 3, 1975, the Syrian-Iraqi talks about the river dispute over the Euphrates waters broke off without the existence of an agreement. On July 8, 1975, Syria asked the Iraqi military attache to leave Damascus within 48 hours. At the same time Iraq accused Syria of intrusions and `provocations' along their 400 miles border. In a note to the Arab League in Cairo, Baghdad said that Syrian warplanes violated its airspace and that Syrian border patrols have ambushed several Iraqi automobiles on the Iraqi side of the border. The dispute started earlier in 1975 over the water rights on the Euphrates river. It is mainly a dispute between the Syrian and the Iraqi wings of the Baathist party. The first MID of RIV1222, MID3176 started on June 6, 1976. 

19760606-20061210 RIV1222-0.25 

On June 13, 1976, Syria accused Iraq of mobilizing 8,000 troops and tanks along the border. On August 22, Syria arrested an group of Iraqi nationals blamed for bombing assassinations within Syria. Iraq closed the border with Syria on November 2, 1976. Iraqi troops and Syrian troops withdrew their troops from the border on November 25, 1976 as part of an agreement negotiated with the help of Egyptian Vice-President Husni Mubarak. On December 15, 1976 Iraq accused Syria of sponsoring an attempted assassination of Sadam Hussein, deputy chairman of the ruling Revolutionary Command Council in an airport bomb blast that killed 3 and injured 230. On March 7, 1982, Syria blamed Iraq and the United States for sponsoring a coup attempt in Syria during February. Syria closed down oil pipelines to Iraq on April 10, 1982, and severed diplomatic relations with Iraq on April 18, 1982. President Mikhail Gorbachev of the Soviet Union offered to mediate between Iraq and Syria on December 24, 1985. On April 2, 1990, Iraq announced that it had deployed binary chemical weapons in ballistic launchers and targeted these on Israel to deter future Israeli attacks on Iraq. It was also announced the same day that these missiles were based in permanent launchers placing Damascus, Syria within their effective range. On August 11, Syria announced that it would deploy troops to Saudi Arabia to join the coalition against Iraq. Troops began arriving on August 14, 1990. On August 11, 1990 Syria declared that it would not aid Iraq in the case of an Israeli attack against Iraqi targets.

The last MID of RIV1222, MID3957 ended on March 3, 1991. On January 9, 1992, Syria said that the ouster of Iraqi President Saddam Hussein was now a necessity. On March 25, 1992, Syria seemed to be softening its policy toward its longtime adversary, Iraq, amid newspaper reports that the two countries are engaged in negotiations that could in time allow Saddam Hussein's Government to pump crude oil through a pipeline to the Syrian Mediterranean coast for the first time in 10 years. Lebanon's leading newspaper, An Nahar, said today that a team of Iraqi technicians was in Syria's capital, Damascus, discussing the possibility of reopening the pipeline, which runs from the oilfield near Kirkuk in northern Iraq to a Syrian port, Baniyas. The report in the Lebanese daily did not provide details, or say if the talks have made any progress. It came two days after the Middle East Economic Survey, an oil specialty publication in Nicosia, Cyprus, said Syria had opened two crossing points on the Iraqi border to allow limited trade. It said that Iraq's trade with Syria seemed to have started in December with a shipment of $15 million in petrochemicals. A third report, written from Damascus for the London-based Lebanese daily newspaper Al Hayat, said this week that the Government of President Hafez al-Assad has decided to press for the lifting of United Nations sanctions against Iraq, the schism between the two Arab countries notwithstanding. Syria and Iraq are ruled by rivals within the Arab Baathist movement, and Mr. Assad is a bitter enemy of President Hussein. Syria contributed troops to the United States-led force that evicted the Iraqi Army from Kuwait a year ago. There have been a number of signals that Syria is easing its hostility toward the Iraqis. Mr. Assad, during a visit to Cairo last week, joined President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt in declaring opposition to the use of force to compel Mr. Hussein's Baghdad Government to yield to United Nations Security Council resolutions requiring the destruction of its weapons of mass destruction. Second, Syrian state-run newspapers available in Beirut indicated that an almost daily war of words against Iraq has stopped. Also, Mr. Assad has expressed dissatisfaction with what he saw as an American policy to restrict arms sales to Arab countries in a way that would give Israel an upper hand at a time when Middle East negotiations are under way. In a speech earlier this month, he said Washington sought to make the Arabs capitulate to Israel. Al Hayat's report said officials in Damascus feel that United States pressure on Iraq to disarm was unjustified now that its troops were no longer occupying Kuwait. The 650-mile pipeline from Kirkuk to Baniyas has been closed since 1982, when Syrian-Iraqi enmity was at its worst. Iraq had exported almost 1.25 million barrels of oil a day through the 30-inch pipeline. The closing of the pipeline then was seen as politically motivated. Syria not only sided with Iran in the war with Iraq, but also received more than $100 million in Iranian crude oil as a reward. The eight-year Iran-Iraq war ended in a United Nations-arranged cease-fire in 1988. Iraq may be turning to Syria at this time out of great need. Jordan and Turkey have begun to crack down on trade with the Iraqis in compliance with Security Council sanctions.

On January 28, 1996, Iraq invited Syria to respond to President Saddam Hussein's call for reconciliation with the Arab states which fought against Baghdad in the 1991 Gulf war. The official Ath-Thawra newspaper said it was "likely that Syria will respond favorably to this initiative" and that it will be followed by Egypt, the United Arab Emirates and other Arab countries. Iraq and Syria broke diplomatic relations in 1980 after Syria took Iran's side in the Iran-Iraq war. "The Syrians know that Iraq historically represents the strategic depth of Syria and realize that it is a pillar if the Arabs want to be masters of their fate," the paper said. "Iraq's call for Arab reconciliation responds to Arab aspirations in these difficult times," it said. On the fifth anniversary of the start of the Gulf war on January 17, 1996, Saddam called for reconciliation with Arab countries which joined the US-led coalition that freed Kuwait. The article appeared as Syria and Iraq prepare to meet on February 10, 1996, in Damascus to discuss sharing the waters of the Euphrates. Both reproach Turkey, where the river rises, of taking too much water.

Syrian and Iraqi water experts began five days of talks on February 10, 1996 in Damascus to forge a joint position on pressing Turkey for a greater share of Euphrates River water, officials said. The deputy secretary at the Iraqi Irrigation Ministry, Abdel Sattar Salman, said the talks would help to forge a joint Syria-Iraq position on water distribution and pollution hazards for one of the Middle East's greatest rivers. ''We have to reach a final settlement for the distribution of the Euphrates'' among Turkey, Syria and Iraq, Salman told United Press International. Syria and Iraq have long accused Turkey of taking more than its fair share of the river, which rises in Turkey and flows through Syria and then Iraq into the gulf. The latter two countries are concerned about Turkish plans to build more dams and power stations along the Euphrates. By a 1987 accord, Turkey is obliged to allow 17,500 cubic feet (500 cubic meters) per second of water into Syria. Syria and Iraq want Turkey to increase that to 23,100 cubic feet (693 cubic meters) per second, so the nations would all have one-third shares of what the downstream countries view an international waterway. Turkey, however, sees the Euphrates as a Turkish river, with Syria and Iraq sharing 50 percent of the flow and the rest remaining in Turkey. ''We are only seeking,'' said Munib Rifai, a lawyer at the Syrian Foreign Ministry, ''the implementation of international laws and a just and acceptable distribution according to these laws.'' Rifai said Syria and Iraq cannot plan irrigation and agriculture policies before the flow argument is resolved. Salman said the Syrian-Iraqi technical panel would also discuss Turkish pollution of the Euphrates and its tributaries. Turkey has denied polluting the river. ''Iraq is the party that suffers most from pollution, because the Euphrates enters Iraq last,'' Salman said.

Syria has turned down a request from Saddam Hussein's government to reopen its border with Iraq, signaling Syria's unwillingness to normalize relations with its Arab rival. The Iraqi request was made during talks this week in Damascus, Syria, to try to work out a common Iraqi-Syrian strategy to deal with a water dispute with Turkey, Arab diplomats said on February 13, 1996. The Iraqi water experts attending the session traveled to Syria through Jordan because the border was closed. Iraq asked Syria to open their common border at least for visiting Iraqi technical teams, said the diplomats, speaking on condition of anonymity. But Damascus refused out of fear that Iraq would try to turn any temporary arrangement into a permanent opening. Syria also has declined an Arab League invitation for the Iraqi and Syrian foreign ministers to meet in Cairo next month, the diplomats said. Syria and Iraq, ruled by rival wings of the Baath Party, have been feuding for years. Syria was a member of the U.S.-led coalition that drove Iraq out of Kuwait in the 1991 Gulf War. But they are trying to resolve the water dispute because they fear Turkey plans to divert water from the Euphrates and Tigris rivers for hydroelectric and irrigation projects. Both rivers originate in Turkey, and are vital sources of water for Syria and Iraq.

In a bid to end Iraq's isolation, Saddam Hussein's government has asked Syria to reopen an oil pipeline that links Iraqi oil fields with the Mediterranean, Iraq sources said on March 17, 1996. Iraq is negotiating with the United Nations on a partial lifting of the ban on Iraqi oil exports, imposed after Iraq's 1990 invasion of neighboring Kuwait. The London-based Al-Hayat newspaper said the Iraqi team negotiating the oil-for-food deal has asked the U.N. to allow some Iraqi oil exports to go through Syria. Under the proposed deal, the U.N. would allow Iraq to export $ 1 billion of crude oil every 90 days so Baghdad can purchase food, medicine and other necessities. Saddam is expected to agree to the deal to counter growing dissatisfaction in Iraq over the country's deteriorating economy. The proposal calls for "a large share" of the oil to go through a 600-mile pipeline through Turkey. With its appeal to Syria, Iraq apparently is seeking a second route. Saddam's deputy, Taha Yassin Ramadan, asked Algerian President Lamain Zeroual this month to mediate with Syrian President Hafez Assad on the pipeline reopening, Iraqi sources said Sunday on condition of anonymity. The pipeline, which has a capacity of 1.4 million barrels a day and terminates at the Syrian port of Banias, was closed by Syria in April 1982. The move was part of Syria's support for Iran in the 1980-88 Iran-Iraq war. The pipeline is believed to be in bad condition and would need substantial repairs. Iraq and Syria have long been rivals. In recent months, however, they have been holding talks on Turkey's plans to build more dams on the Euphrates River. The dams could reduce downstream flow to Iraq and Syria. Last month Syria opened its border to allow an Iraqi delegation to cross for the first time since 1979.

Syria was ready to open its borders to trade with Iraq, ending 17 years of closed frontiers between the rival Arab neighbors, a Syrian official said on May 21, 1997. The move would ease Iraq's isolation. The United Nations imposed economic sanctions against Iraq in 1990 and banned flights to the country. Most traffic to Iraq now passes through northern Turkey or Jordan. ''The land link between Iraq and Syria will be activated shortly to serve the common interests of the two countries,'' Rateb Shalah, the head of Syria's Chamber of Commerce, told the official Iraqi News Agency. Iraq severed relations with Syria and closed the borders after Damascus sided with Iran during the 1980-88 Iran-Iraq War. Syria sent troops to support the U.S.-led coalition that drove Iraqi forces from Kuwait in February 1991 and has kept the border closed. ''We have come to ... reestablish the normal trade and industrial relations between Iraq and Syria,'' said Shalah, who crossed the land border Monday. Shalah's visit to Baghdad will focus on potential Syrian exports to Iraq under the U.N. oil-for-food deal that began in December. The deal is an exemption from the sweeping trade sanctions imposed after Iraq's 1990 invasion of Kuwait. Iraq and Syria are led by rival factions of the pan-Arab Baath party and relations have long been strained.

In a sign of thawing relations, Syria announced on June 14, 1997, that it has opened three border crossing points with Iraq, ending 17 years of closed frontiers between the countries. Iraq only has open borders with neighboring Jordan and Turkey and the move could help ease Baghdad's isolation. Rateb Shallah, chairman of Syria's chamber of commerce, told Syrian and Iraqi businessmen Saturday that three border points are open and passengers and cargo may cross from either side of the border. He did not specify when the border points were opened. Earlier, an Iraqi business delegation held talks with Syrian officials and businessmen on ways to transport imported European goods into Iraq. Shallah said that as a sign of good will Syria will organize a trade fair in Baghdad in July. He also said Iraq will take part in this year's Damascus international trade fair. Baghdad has boycotted the trade fair since it severed diplomatic relations and closed its borders with Syria in 1980 after Damascus backed Iran during the 1980-88 Iran-Iraq War. 

As Syrian medical manufacturers opened an exhibit on July 27, 1997, in Baghdad, the photos of Presidents Saddam Hussein of Iraq and Hafez Assad of Syria at the entranceway signaled a warming of ties between the two old enemies. It was the first business show by Syrian companies in Iraq in 17 years and the first time in just as long since the presidential portraits were displayed together in Baghdad. Saddam and Assad have long been enemies as leaders of rival wings of the Arab Baath Socialist Party with both claiming to be the party's sole leader but signs increasingly point to a rapprochement. Speeches opening the show by Syrian pharmaceutical and medical firms made the routine criticisms of the United States and Britain for maintaining U.N. sanctions on Iraq since Iraq's1990 invasion of neighboring Kuwait. But Health Minister Omid Midhat Mubarak also said he expected Syria to supply Iraq with products under the oil-for-food deal with the United Nations. ''Syrians came late in the first phase of the oil-for-food deal, but they will have better chance in the second phase,'' said Mubarak. In early June, agreement was reached for Syria to supply Iraq with dollars 20 million in products during the first six-month phase of the program. That led to the opening of the borders between the two countries for the first time since 1980.

Iraq has readied a joint pipeline via Syria for operation but is waiting for Damascus' nod to resume pumping, a senior Oil Ministry official said on March 1, 2000. ''Once we get the green light from Syria, the pipeline should be ready for exports within weeks or months,'' Faiz Shaheen, a deputy oil minister, said in remarks carried by the official Iraqi News Agency. Syria shut the line in 1982, dealing a severe blow to Iraq, then bogged down in a ruinous war with non-Arab Iran. Syria, which sided with non-Iran in the 1980-88 war, further angered Baghdad when it contributed to a U.S.-led multinational force which drove Iraqi troops from Kuwait in the 1991 Gulf War. Ruled by rival factions of the ruling Baath party, the governments of Iraq and Syria were at loggerheads for years until a partial thaw in 1997 when a cash-strapped Syria sought trade deals with Iraq under a U.N.-approved oil-for-food program. Iraq has opened an interests section in Syria, the first formal diplomatic link between the countries in over 19 years. Syria is expected to follow suit shortly. The two Arab neighbors first agreed to reopen the pipeline system which links Iraq's Kirkuk oil fields in the north of the country to the Mediterranean terminals of Banias as well as Tripoli in Lebanon in July 1998. If operated at full capacity, the pipeline can handle up to 1.4 million barrels a day. But Shaheen said Iraq would initially try to pump no more than 350,000 barrels daily if Syria agrees to the resumption of its use. He said Syria was already using the line to ferry its own crude to terminals on the Mediterranean. Under the U.N.-authorized oil-for-food program, Iraq can only use its terminals on the Gulf and a twin-pipeline via Turkey for exports. Reopening the Syrian line needs U.N. permission. The oil-for-food program began in late 1996 to soften the effects of U.N. sanctions slapped on Iraq in 1990 for invading Kuwait. It allows Iraq to sell crude under U.N. supervision to buy food and other essential items.

On August 12, 2001, the visit by Syrian Prime Minister Mustafa Miro to Iraq, the first by a premier from Damascus since ties were broken off in 1980, marks a new stage in improving ties between the two neighbors. Miro's trip crowns efforts since 1997 by Iraq and Syria, governed by rival branches of the pan-Arab Baath party, to start to normalize relations after a 17-year break in ties. The two countries had been locked in hostility since Syria backed Iran in its 1980-1988 war with Iraq. Syria also fought in the 1991 international coalition that ousted Iraq from Kuwait after seven months of occupation. Iraq, which has been under a sweeping UN trade embargo since invading Kuwait in 1990, signed a free trade accord with Syria effective from April 1, and both countries have set up trade offices in each other's capitals. The two countries have also opened diplomatic missions and cancelled visas for people travelling between the states. While Miro's visit is dominated by economic matters, the timing of his trip, with the region gripped with tension over the Palestinian territories, lends it an important political dimension with both Iraq and Syria considered sworn enemies of Israel. "Syrian-Iraqi talks come at a time of great tension in the region and we must close ranks in the face of Israeli threats," an Iraqi official, asking not to be named, told AFP. "Enemies will continue to harm the Arabs because they know what good relations between countries mean, especially Iraq and Syria, which surprised them," Iraqi President Saddam Hussein said in talks Saturday with Miro. "We urgently need more Arab solidarity to face up to the hostile policy of Israel, which is trying to annihilate the intifada of the Palestinian people by force," Miro said. "Cooperation and coordination between Iraq and Syria serves the interests of both countries, boosts Arab solidarity and the position of the Palestinian people in the valiant intifada," the Syrian premier said. Miro also delivered a letter from Syrian President Bashar al-Assad to Saddam, stressing the "support of the Syrian people for Iraq and its solidarity with the fight to lift the unjust embargo" on Iraq. "All aggression against Iraq is an aggression against Syria," warned Miro, who is accompanied by a delegation of businessmen. On the economic front, the two countries are set to sign a series of agreements to double bilateral trade to one billion dollars a year compared to 500 million dollars currently. An Iraqi official announced in July that Baghdad will give priority to Syria, among others, in import contracts under the UN oil-for-food program for its support for Iraq in opposing US and British proposals to impose "smart" sanctions on Baghdad. Syria and Iraq are examining plans to build a new oil pipeline, while the industry press said an old pipeline-closed since 1982 after the break in ties-was reopened last November. Damascus has explained to the US State Department that the old pipeline was only being "tested", while Baghdad said in March that it had become obsolete and needed to be replaced.

Iraq will support Syria in the event of an Israeli attack, said Iraqi Vice President Taha Yassin Ramadan at a joint press conference with visiting Syrian Prime Minister Mohammed Mustafa Miro on August 13, 2001. "It is clear that we support Syria in all fields, including the military field," said Ramadan, stressing that Iraq supports Damascus against Israeli threats to launch a new war in the Middle East. For his part, Miro said that Syria opposes any attempt aimed at interfering in the internal affairs of Iraq and its unity. "Syria takes a firm position against all challenges faced by the Iraqi people, no matter what those challenges might be," noted Miro. Miro, heading a high-level delegation, arrived in the Iraqi capital Saturday by plane for a historic three-day visit. It was the first visit by a Syrian prime minster to Iraq in more than 20 years. Miro said that during the visit, the two sides signed several agreements and protocols, including the Agreement for Economic, Trade, Technical, Cultural and Scientific Cooperation, as well as a Memo of Understanding between the foreign ministries of the two countries. "Both sides have agreed to hold annual meetings to activate the concluded agreements and protocols," Miro said. As to the oil pipeline linking the two nations, Ramadan said that "the Syrian side has agreed to build a new pipeline after they found out that the original pipeline has become too old." Damascus has explained to the U.S. that the old pipeline, reopened last November, was only being "tested," and both countries are examining plans to build a new one to transport Iraqi crude to the Mediterranean through Syria. During the visit, Miro also held talks with Iraqi President Saddam Hussein and other senior Iraqi officials on means of further strengthening bilateral relations, trade ties in particular. Upon arrival at Iraq's Saddam International Airport on Saturday, Miro reiterated Syria's call for lifting the 11-year-old United Nations embargo imposed on Iraq, saying that "it violates the principles of the U.N. and the international law." Iraq has been under sweeping U.N. sanctions since its invasion of neighboring Kuwait in August 1990, which triggered the 1991 Gulf War. During the meeting with Saddam on Sunday, Miro voiced opposition to the air raids on Iraq by the U.S. and Britain, saying that "all aggressions against Iraq are aggressions against Syria," quoted by the official Iraqi News Agency. One day before Miro's visit to Baghdad, the U.S.-British warplanes bombed targets inside Iraq's southern no-fly zones, killing one and injuring 11 others as claimed by Iraq. Since the Gulf War, the U.S. and British jets have regularly patrolled and shelled targets inside the two no-fly zones in southern and northern Iraq with the claimed aim of protecting the Kurds in the north and Shiite Muslims in the south from the persecution of the Iraqi government. Miro's visit crowned efforts by Iraq and Syria, ruled by rival branches of the pan-Arab Baath Party, to start to improve ties in recent years. Miro, scheduled to leave Iraq later Monday, was also the second highest-ranking official from the Arab world to visit Iraq since the Gulf War. Jordanian Prime Minister Ali Abu Ragheb took the lead by flying to Baghdad last November. Baghdad-Damascus ties were broken off when Syria sided with Iran in the Iraq-Iran war from 1980-88 and further deteriorated when Syria joined the U.S.-led multinational coalition force in the Gulf War that evicted Iraqi troops out of Kuwait after a seven-month occupation. However, there has been a rapid rapprochement between Iraq and Syria since 1997 when they started to re-open their borders and resume economic cooperation. Ramadan visited Damascus last January and was among the top-ranking Iraqi officials to have traveled to Syria in recent years. During his stay in Damascus, Ramadan and Miro signed a free trade agreement, similar to the one signed between Iraq and Egypt earlier this year.

Syria voted in favor of UN sanctions on Iraq on May 16, 2002, but argued vociferously against them. Iraq is turning old enemies in the Middle East into new friends, seeking regional allies in a bid to complicate Washington's plans to oust Saddam Hussein. Using smuggled oil as a lever, say diplomats here, Baghdad is reversing 30 years of hostility to Syria and has boosted its influence in Damascus to unprecedented heights. Though Syrian officials deny the country is buying Iraqi oil in breach of UN sanctions, they acknowledge that legal trade with their neighbor and historic rival has melted old enmities. "We can say that our relations with Iraq are back to normal," says Adnan Omran, Syrian minister of information. Syrian trade with Iraq under the oil-for-food program permitted by the UN reached an estimated $ 1 billion last year, double the 2000 figure. The two countries signed a free-trade pact last year, and resolved a decades-old dispute over the waters of the Euphrates River that had brought them to the brink of war in 1975. Western diplomats, however, say the ties are even stronger. They suspect Damascus of buying another billion dollars' worth of Iraqi oil illegally last year, providing much needed funding to Saddam Hussein's regime. And there have been reports that Syria is brokering the sale to Iraq of a sophisticated Ukrainian military radar system. The relationship has not always been so cozy. Syria and Iraq are ruled by rival branches of the Baath party, a pan-Arab socialist movement. Ties between the two countries soured in 1966 over ideological differences, later fueled by a deep personal animosity between Iraq's President Hussein and Hafez al-Assad, Syria's wily and uncompromising former president who died in June 2000. The bilateral relationship was characterized by assassinations and bombings in each other's capitals and venomous accusations broadcast over the airwaves. Then in 1990, Syria joined the US-led alliance against Baghdad in the wake of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait. The first signs of a rapprochement between the two countries came in June 1997, when their mutual border was opened for the first time since 1980 to allow the exchange of trade delegations. Since then, commercial relations have flourished. In July 1998, the two countries agreed to re-open a 552-mile pipeline linking the Kirkuk oil fields in northern Iraq with the Syrian port of Banias on the Mediterranean. Last year, Syria and Iraq signed a free-trade agreement and announced that they had resolved their dispute over the waters of the Euphrates. In January, Britain accused Syria of importing at least 100,000 barrels of oil per day in 2001 in breach of UN sanctions. Other estimates have placed the oil imports as high as 200,000 barrels per day, sending up to $ 1 billion to go directly to the Iraqi regime. "It's absolutely not true," says Mr. Omran. "It's another example of Israel printing certain accusations against Syria [which are] then believed in Washington." US officials, however, are unimpressed with Syria's denials, describing them as "nonsense" and warning that Syria should "think carefully" about the repercussions of its growing detente with Iraq. Yet Washington has kept relatively silent on Syria's alleged importing of Iraqi oil. The reason partly lies in the fact that Syria is not the only alleged beneficiary. Jordan and Turkey, key regional allies of the US, also allegedly benefit from the illicit oil trade with Iraq. Syrians widely view the sanctions regime against Iraq as an example of American double standards in the Middle East and do not believe it should deter Damascus from forging a valuable economic partnership with Baghdad. "The opening of the Iraqi market has helped Syria tremendously," says economist Nabil Sukkar. "There is a high level of trade between the two countries, and it should continue as much as possible, regardless of sanctions." A Syrian political analyst agrees. "Syria's relationship with Iraq is very important economically and now politically," says the analyst. "American policy regarding Syria is in a way pushing the Syrians closer to Iraq. If America maintains a tough line with Syria, then I see Syria having an even deeper relationship with Iraq which might lead to more tension in the region." Syria used its position on the UN Security Council to sharply criticize sanctions against Iraq during a debate earlier this week. But it decided at the last moment to vote Tuesday in favor of a resolution aimed at speeding up the supply of humanitarian goods to Iraq while maintaining a ban on armaments. The strategic ramifications of Syria's ties to Iraq are "troubling" for Washington, analysts say, particularly as Iraq's cautious rapprochement with Iran is helping to create an arc of hard-line states that could have an impact on Middle East peace. A formal alliance between Syria, Iraq, and Iran is unlikely because of the deep structural divisions between them, says George Jabbour, an adjunct professor of law at Aleppo University. "But at the same time, Israel has to be counterbalanced, and coordination between Syria, Iraq, and Iran should make Israel more cautious in its aggressive foreign policy against Palestinians and other Arabs," he says.

Syria is trying to stop fighters from crossing the border into Iraq to fight the U.S.-led forces, the head of the Iraqi Governing Council said on December 21, 2003. Speaking to reporters after talks with Syrian President Bashar Assad, the IGC chairman Abdul Aziz al-Hakim told reporters his administration planned to sign agreements with Syria to improve security along their common border. "There must be cooperation (between Syria and Iraq) in order to stop (militant) operations and prevent illegal infiltrators from crossing" into Iraq, he told a news conference. "We are seeking, through the Iraqi Interior Ministry, to sign agreements (with Syria) to solve the security problem from which Syria is suffering as much as Iraq does," al-Hakim said. He did not say when such agreements would be signed. Al-Hakim said Syria was "cooperating with us to stop the terrorist actions perpetrated by terrorist groups." Syria was one of the staunchest opponents of the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq in March and has been a vocal critic of the subsequent occupation. Nevertheless, al-Hakim said: "Syria does not want Iraq to be unstable and ... it doesn't want operations in Iraq against the Iraqi people's interests." Al-Hakim said his talks with Assad focused on ways to boost trade and security relations, including the stopping of militants infiltrating into Iraq. Syria has said it is opposed to such infiltration, but cannot stop everybody from crossing the long desert border with Iraq. Last week, U.S. President George W. Bush signed the Syria Accountability and Lebanese Sovereignty Restoration Act, which calls for economic sanctions to be imposed on Syria on various grounds. Among other things, the act accuses Syria of hosting Palestinian militant groups and not doing enough to stop militants and weapons from crossing the border into Iraq. Al-Hakim, who arrived in Syria on Saturday night, left for Russia on Sunday. His visit was part of tour that has already taken him to Iran, Spain, France, Britain and the United Arab Emirates.

Syria and Iraq must begin a new stage of honest cooperation now that the dictatorship in Iraq has come to an end, Iraqi Prime Minister Iyad Allawi said on July 23, 2004. Syria was already cooperating with Iraq doing its best to stop the infiltration of radical Muslims into Iraq, according to Syrian government's declarations. This visit by Allawi signaled a change in the relations between the two countries-and a request to continue improving the relations. A water cooperation agreement was started in 2005 and in 2006 ambassadors were exchanged.

In comments to Syria's state-run official news agency upon his arrival in Damascus on a regional tour, Allawi also thanked Syria for supporting and welcoming Iraqis "when we were struggling against the dictatorship in Iraq." Iraqis opposed to Saddam Hussein had long found a haven in Syria, whose branch of the Baath Party broke with the Iraqi Baath in 1966. "We must begin a new stage of honest and brotherly cooperation, coordination and unity, now that the dictatorship in Iraq has ended and sovereignty has been transferred to the Iraqi people," Allawi told SANA. Allawi was greeted at the airport by Syrian Prime Minister Naji al-Otari, with whom he held talks later Friday on political and economic cooperation and other matters. "We hope this visit will strengthen relations. We are one people in two countries," al-Otari said. Allawi was to meet with Syrian President Bashar Assad and hold a press conference. He then moves on to neighboring Lebanon on a tour that already has taken him to Egypt and Lebanon. Friction between Syria and Iraq had begun to ease in the 1990s and Syria strongly opposed the U.S-led invasion of Iraq. Syria has greeted Allawi's government with suspicion, questioning whether it is a U.S. puppet regime. During a meeting of Iraq's neighbors and Egypt in Cairo earlier this week, the Syrian delegation proposed condemning a purported role in Iraq of U.S.-ally Israel. The issue was defused when Iraq's foreign minister denied the reports and invited Arab countries to send military or security officials to investigate for themselves. Otari raised Israel again after his talks with Allawi, telling his news agency he believed Israel was somehow fomenting violence in Iraq. Otari also said the departure of U.S.-led forces would bring calm in Iraq and lead to "security and stability in the entire region." Allawi, who was appointed last month as head of the interim Iraqi government, was expected to discuss cooperation in controlling the long Iraqi-Syrian border, postwar reconstruction, Iraqi assets frozen in Syrian banks since a U.S.-led coalition toppled Saddam's regime and the possibility of Arab countries contributing soldiers to a U.N. security contingent in Iraq. Syria has denied charges that it was allowing foreign Islamic militants to enter Iraq from its territories to attack U.S.-led coalition forces there but also said it cannot thoroughly police its border with its eastern neighbor. The infiltration issue has soured relations between Damascus and Washington, playing a role in a recent U.S. decision to impose trade sanctions on Syria. Syrian Foreign Minister Farouk al-Sharaa reiterated in Cairo this week that Syria was doing all it can to control its border with Iraq. Iraq's neighbors at the Cairo meeting agreed to hold a high-level meeting to address the issue of cross-border infiltration. Earlier this month, Syria and Iraq agreed to set up a special security force to prevent infiltration of foreign fighters across their shared border. During this visit by Iraqi Prime Minister Iyad Allawi to Syria, the two governments discussed the issue of Iraqi assests frozen in two Syrian banks since the fall of Saddam Husayn's regime. Syria initially said it would only release the funds-estimated to be around 800m dollars-to "an Iraqi national government". Syrian sources told Al-Hayat newspaper that Damascus is willing to settle the dispute, but added that Iraq also has debts it needs to settle with Syria. "The Iraqi accounts do exist. The funds are in safekeeping and we are willing to resolve the dispute in conformity with regulations," the source told Al-Hayat. 

Syria has been supplying Iraq with water since mid-June 2005 in a show of solidarity with the Iraqi people "who are passing through very delicate circumstances", the state-run al-Thawra newspaper reported, quoting Syrian Irrigation Minister Nader al-Buni. Al-Buni told al-Thawra that Syria has supplied Iraq with 670 million cubic metres of water per second from the Euphrates River over the past two weeks, adding that the supply will continue for the next three months. The supply comes as part of an agreement between Syria and Iraq in Damscus on June 11, 2005, between al-Buni and his Iraqi counterpart Abdul-Latif Jamal Rashid in which Syria promised to allow a greater flow of water to pass into Iraq for a limited period of no longer than three months. In the report, al-Buni said the two countries were determined to implement Syria's pumping station on the Tigris, referring to the reactivation of joint research cooperation and the foundation of Syrian-Iraqi companies to study designs for irrigation projects. Al-Buni also noted that an international committee will convene soon in Damascus to follow up water relations between Syria, Iraq and Turkey. The water supplied to Iraq will contribute in increasing much needed electrical power from the Hudaytha dam.

Syria announced on February 2, 2006, that it would exchange ambassadors with Iraq after a new Iraqi government is formed, Syria's official news agency reported, marking the first time Damascus has set a time frame for restoring full diplomatic ties with Baghdad after a 23-year break. "After the formation of the new Iraqi government, (Syria and Iraq) will exchange ambassadors, and delegations from both countries will make visits to strengthen cooperation in all fields," Syrian Foreign Minister Farouk al-Sharaa told a visiting delegation of Iraqi journalists, according to SANA. He said Syria wished to have "the closest relations with Iraq based on historical and geographical ties." Syria broke relations with Baghdad in 1982 after accusing Iraq of inciting riots by the banned Muslim Brotherhood in Syria. Commercial ties improved in the last few years of Saddam Hussein's regime before he was overthrown in 2003. The two countries maintain only interest sections in each other's capitals. There have been talks in the past year between Syria and Iraq on restoring diplomatic ties and exchanging ambassadors but no date has been set for opening embassies and appointing ambassadors. Al-Sharaa added that Syria was "committed to Iraq's territorial integrity, ending (its) occupation and enabling the Iraqi people to govern themselves." The announcement comes at a time Syria is feeling increasingly isolated, particularly over last year's assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri by a truck bombing in Beirut. A U.N. commission investigating the killing has already implicated top Syrian security officials in the assassination. Syria has also been in hot water over its alleged failure to stem the flow of foreign fighters using its territory to infiltrate across the porous border into Iraq. The Iraqi government called on Arab governments last year to send in ambassadors to Baghdad but some countries have been reluctant to do so following abductions and killings of diplomats. Last July, al-Qaida in Iraq abducted the top Egyptian envoy in Baghdad and two Algerian diplomats. It later announced they had been killed. The group also snatched two Moroccan embassy employees in June and said that it had sentenced them to death, though it never stated whether it carried out the sentences.

Syrian Foreign Minister Walid Moallem will begin a landmark visit to Iraq on November 19, 2006, a key parliamentarian and Iraqi Foreign Ministry official said. Moallem would be the highest ranking Syrian official to visit since the U.S.-ouster of Saddam Hussein in 2003 and a major step toward restoring diplomatic relations, Kurdish legislator Mahmoud Othman said. A senior Foreign Ministry official confirmed the visit on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to release the information. Moallem is scheduled to arrive in the afternoon and will meet Hoshyar Zebari, his Iraqi counterpart, Othman said. Syria's top diplomat also was to meet with President Jalal Talabani. Both the Iraqi government and its U.S. sponsors have repeatedly accused Syria of allowing foreign fighters to cross into Iraq. Syria denies the charge, saying it is impossible to control the long desert border. Syria and Iraq, both then ruled by rival factions of the Baath Party, resumed trade relations in 1997. Ties began to improve with the turn of the century, when former Syrian Prime Minister Mohammed Mustafa Miro visited Iraq in 2001.

20061211-20159999 0.5 

Iraq reopened its embassy in Syria on December 11, 2006, ending almost a quarter-century of severed ties between the two countries. The Iraqi flag was raised over the new Damascus diplomatic office in the presence of representatives from the foreign ministries of both countries, while a similar ceremony was scheduled to take place in Baghdad with the opening of the Syrian embassy in Iraq. "The opening of the embassy is a tangible expression of the goodwill of Iraq and Syria to resume full diplomatic relations that would further increase ties of fraternity and co-operation between the two countries," said Syrian Deputy Foreign Minister Farouk Taha in Damascus. Iraqi foreign ministry representative Libeid al-Abawi said the opening of the embassy would be followed by other measures relating to naming ambassadors. The new Iraqi embassy is located close to the US embassy in the city. Taha said the opening of the embassy underlined Syrian support for the political process aimed at preserving Iraqi territorial unity. Al-Abawi said an Iraqi security delegation, headed by the country's interior minister, would visit Syria in the coming days for talks. "I hope this step would be a prelude to establishing constructive and developed relations ... and to resolving all outstanding (issues) between the two countries," al-Abawi said. Syria broke ties with Iraq in 1982, accusing it of inciting riots by the banned Muslim Brotherhood. Syria also sided with Iran in the 1980-88 Iran-Iraq war. 

This has continued until 2016 in spite of the civil war in Syria.

PS-SOURCES: New York Times October 2, 1949; November 26, 1956; February 10, 1950; May 17, 1951; September 27, 1957; January 6, 1960; January 26, 1962; September 3, 1963; October 25, 1963; February 9, 1965; February 18, 1967; August 13, 1970; January 19, 1973; January 16, 1974; February 28, 1975; May 4, 1975; July 9, 1975; Associated Press March 16, 1959; March 23, 1992; May 21, 1997; June 14, 1997; July 27, 1997; March 1, 2000; December 21, 2003; July 23, 2004; February 2, 2006; November 19, 2006; United Press International February 10, 1996; New York Times March 26, 1992; March 17, 1996; Agence France Presse January 9, 1992; January 28, 1996; August 12, 2001; Xinhua August 13, 2001; Christian Science Monitor May 16, 2002; Deutsche Presse Agentur June 28, 2005; BBC July 27, 2004; Business Day December 12, 2006

MARITIME-MIDS:

MARITIME-DISPUTE:

Discussion:

SOURCES: Gibler, D.M. 2018. Militarized Interstate Dispute Narratives, 1816-2010. Langham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. 

Huth, Paul K., and Todd L. Allee. (2002) The Democratic Peace and Territorial Conflict in the Twentieth Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
