FILE: cm651670v11.0.txt
DYAD: EGYPT-SAUDI ARABIA
RIVALRY: RIV1247
DISPUTE(S): MID1108 MID2153 MID2360 MID1109 MID2362 

PS: 19370526-19570503 0.5 19570504-19620930 0.25 19621001-19670514 0.00 19670515-20209999 0.5

PS-UPDATE2020:

PS-NOTES:

PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20220321
PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20220321

Territorial-Maritime-Boundary Issues Variables

MID1108

TERRMID: MID1108 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID1108 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID1108 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID1108 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID1108 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID1108 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID1108 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID1108 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID1108 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID1108 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID1108 1 -- civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID1108 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID1108 from Gibler 2018, the Royalists were armed and received arms support from the UK, making them a militarized rebel group. See COUPLINK-NOTES. 

COUPMID: MID1108 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID1108 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID1108 1 -- coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID1108 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: MID1108 from Gibler 2018, the leader of Yemen died in 1962, leaving his son, Mohammad al-Badr, in charge of the country. A military leader staged a coup; al-Badr fled the country; and USSR, China, and Egypt recognized the new government. The exiled Royalists established a government-in-exile and were supported by Saudi Arabia, and Jordan. Saudi troops clashed with Yemeni troops in Yemen, and Egypt attacked the Saudis. Jordanian troops also clashed with Yemeni troops. Coded coup link because this was connected to a coup in Yemen. 

MID2153

TERRMID: MID2153 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID2153 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID2153 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID2153 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID2153 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID2153 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID2153 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID2153 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID2153 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID2153 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID2153 1 -- civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID2153 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID2153 from Gibler 2018, in 1964 the king of Saudi Arabia threatened to send Saudi troops to Yemen if Egypt did not with draw their troops. Egypt and Saudi were supporting opposite sides in Yemen's civil war. Coded civil war link because this was connected to the civil war in Yemen, outside this dyad. 

COUPMID: MID2153 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID2153 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID2153 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID2153 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID2360

TERRMID: MID2360 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID2360 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID2360 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID2360 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID2360 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID2360 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID2360 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID2360 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID2360 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID2360 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID2360 1 -- civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID2360 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID2360 from Gibler 2018, in 1965 during the ongoing Yemen Civil War, Saudi Arabia was supporting the royalists (rebels), while Egypt was supporting the government. Egypt attempted to cut the Royalists' supply line, and Egypt and Saudi troops clashed. They eventually agreed to a cease-fire and to end their opposing support. Coded civil war link because this was connected to a civil war in Yemen, outside this dyad. 

COUPMID: MID2360 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID2360 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID2360 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID2360 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID1109

TERRMID: MID1109 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID1109 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID1109 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID1109 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID1109 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID1109 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID1109 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID1109 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID1109 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID1109 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID1109 1 -- civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID1109 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID1109 from Gibler 2018, Saudi Arabia and Egypt were still supporting opposite sides in the Yemeni Civil War. In 1966, Egypt threatened to invade Saudi Arabia and bombed several targets in Saudi Arabia due to Saudi support for the Royalists. Coded civil war link because this was connected to the Yemen Civil War, outside this dyad. 

COUPMID: MID1109 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID1109 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID1109 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID1109 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID2362

TERRMID: MID2362 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID2362 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID2362 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID2362 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID2362 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID2362 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID2362 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID2362 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID2362 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID2362 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID2362 1 -- civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID2362 3 -- uncertain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID2362 from Gibler, Miller, and Little 2016, this MID describes the same events as MID1109. Egypt and Saudi Arabia supported opposite sides in the Yemen Civil War, and Egypt bombed several Saudi targets. Coded civil war link because this was connected to the Yemen Civil War, and coded uncertain because GML recommend this case be dropped. 

COUPMID: MID2362 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID2362 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID2362 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID2362 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

RIVNOTES: 

NARRATIVE-CM:
Egyptian military aircraft bombed several Saudi Arabian villages near the North Yemen border on November 5-6, 1962. Saudi Arabia severed diplomatic relations with Egypt on November 6, 1962. The United States deployed military aircraft and naval ships in the region in a display of support for Saudi Arabia. President Kennedy of the US offered to facilitate negotiations between Saudi Arabia and Egypt on November 27, 1962. Egyptian military aircraft attacked Najran in southern Saudi Arabia on December 30, 1962 and January 1, 1963. Prince Faisal of Saudi Arabia ordered a mobilization of Saudi troops on January 3, 1963. Egyptian military aircraft bombed Najran and Jizan, Saudi Arabia on May 11-14, 1967, resulting in the death of one civilian. Britain condemned Egypt for the bombings of Najran and Jizan on May 18, 1967.

SOURCES-CM: 
*Facts on File*, November 29-December 5, 1962; *Keesing*, March 16-23, 1963.

NARRATIVE-CR:
The rivalry between Egypt and Saudi Arabia is connected to the issue of Arab unity. The concept of a single Arab state stretching from the Atlantic Ocean to the Persian Gulf never had much appeal within Saudi Arabia. Most Saudis interpreted Arab unity to mean that the principal Arab governments should strive for solidarity on major regional and international issues; respect the individual differences of each Arab country; and refrain from interference in one another's internal affairs. This was a conservative view in comparison with the ideas advocated by intellectuals and political leaders in Egypt, Iraq, Libya, and Syria, as well as within the Palestinian movement. The differing perspectives caused frequent tensions, especially with Egypt. The most severe strain in Saudi-Egyptian relations occurred between 1957 and 1967 when Gamal Abdul Nasser was president of Egypt. Nasser expressed Arab nationalist rhetoric included criticisms of the Saudi regime as corrupt rulers and puppets of the United States. His government supported revolutionary groups opposed to the Saudi regime. In addition, Riyadh believed that Nasser was involved in major political upheavals such as the military overthrow of monarchies in Iraq (1958), Yemen (1962), and Libya (1969). It is within this context that the rivalry between the two states takes place.

The rivalry transpired militarily in the Yemeni Civil War from 1962 until 1967 with MID1108 MID2153 MID2360 MID1109 MID2362. Imam Ahmad had ruled Yemen since 1948. He died in September of 1962 and was succeeded by his son Imam Huhammad al Ba Badr. A week later, a group of military officers headed by Colonnel Abdullah al-Sallal and aided by exiled Yemenis in Egypt toppled his monarchy. Both Saudi Arabia and Jordan feared that the crisis in Yemen would spread to their states and destabilize their own monarchies. This fear motivated Saudi intervention. They responded by aiding the Royalists led by the deposed monarch. Egypt deployed several thousand troops to the YAR in November of 1962. In November of 1962, Egyptian aircraft attacked five Saudi villages. Continued Egyptian bombing of Saudi positions led to a general mobilization of Saudi forces. The YAR received backing from the USSR as well. 

In May of 1964, the Royalists attacked Republican positions. The YAR and Egypt countered with the Horadeh offensive sealing the border with Saudi Arabia. Supplies could no longer get through from Saudi Arabia to Yemeni Royalists. Prince Faisal visited Alexandria for talks with Nasir. They agreed on a cease-fire taking effect in November of 1964. 

In December of 1964, the Saudis backed a Royalist counter offensive that succeeded in gaining a significant amount of Republican territory. The Egyptians and the YAR countered in January of 1965. The Saudis alleged that in this offensive the Egyptians dropped chemical weapons on the battlefield. Heavy fighting continued until mid 1965. Faisal and Nasir agreed to another cease-fire in August of 1965. Among the issues agreed to here was a plebiscite to determine the future of Yemen. This marked a lull in the conflict.

From October of 1966 until September of 1967 the final phase of the conflict occurred. In November of 1965, Yemen, Saudi Arabia, and Egypt met to hammer out the plebiscite agenda. They failed to reach agreement and fighting resumed. Another series of intense exchanges proceeded until June of 1967. 

A major factor associated with the termination of the rivalry between Egypt and Saudi Arabia was the Six Day War and the consequent fallout in Egyptian internal and external relations. On 5 June 1967, the Israelis launched a preemptive offensive strike against the Egyptian Air Force completely destroying its planes on the ground. 

Egypt's losses in the war were enormous. They lost approximately 10,000 soldiers and 80 percent of their military equipment was destroyed. Sinai was under Israeli control, and the Suez Canal was blocked and closed to shipping. On June 9, Nasser spoke on television and took full responsibility for the fiasco. He resigned as president, but the Egyptian people poured into the streets to demonstrate their support for him. The cabinet and the National Assembly voted not to accept the resignation, and Nasser withdrew it. 

Soon after the cease-fire, there was a broad shake-up in the Egyptian military and government. Field Marshal Amir and Minister of Defense Badran, who had been chosen for the post by Amir, were forced to resign. General Muhammad Fawzi became commander in chief, and Nasser retained the position of supreme commander. On June 19, Nasser enlarged his political powers by assuming the role of prime minister. 

On August 25, 1967, Amir and fifty other high-ranking military and civilian officials were arrested and accused of plotting to overthrow Nasser. Approximately two weeks later, the government announced that Amir, who was once considered Nasser's closest associate among the Free Officers, had committed suicide by taking poison while under house arrest. 

The Arab League including Egypt and Saudi Arabia held a summit conference in Khartoum in September 1967. At that meeting, Nasser and Faisal came to an agreement: Nasser would stop his attempts to destabilize the Saudi regime, and in return, Saudi Arabia would give Egypt the financial aid needed to rebuild its army and retake the territory lost to Israel. At the conference, the Arab leaders were united in their opposition to Israel and proclaimed what became known as "the three no's" of the Khartoum summit: no peace with Israel, no negotiations, no recognition. 

The Six Day War contributed directly to a rapprochement between Saudi Arabia and Egypt. Initially, the normalization of relations proceeded gradually. After Anwar Sadat became president of Egypt in 1970, close economic and political ties between the two countries developed rapidly. The Saudis encouraged Sadat to expel Soviet military advisers from Egypt. Sadal also stopped Cairo's assistance to revolutionary groups operating in the Arabian Peninsula. 

During the October 1973 War, Saudi Arabia supported Egypt by initiating an embargo on oil shipments to the United States and European countries that backed Israel. Subsequently, Riyadh encouraged Egyptian participation in United States-mediated negotiations aimed at obtaining phased Israeli withdrawals from Egyptian and Syrian territory occupied in 1967. 

The Saudis were not prepared for a separate Egyptian peace treaty with Israel in 1978. The Saudis genuinely believed that resolving the grievances of the Palestinians was essential. Thus, they reacted negatively the Egyptian Israeli summit meeting at Camp David. Riyadh refused to support the Egyptian decision and joined with the other Arab states in condemning the initiative. After the Camp David Accords were signed in March 1979, Saudi Arabia broke diplomatic relations with Egypt and cut off economic aid. Sadat responded by broadcasting anti-Saudi speeches.

The impact of other major developments such as the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979, the outbreak of the Iran-Iraq War in 1980, Sadat's assassination in 1981, Israel's 1982 invasion of Lebanon, and persistent tensions with Libyan leader Muammar al Qadhafi encouraged Saudi leaders to reevaluate their policy of isolating Egypt. Riyadh, however, was reluctant to take any bold initiatives toward normalizing relations with Cairo. Instead, it provided tacit approval for efforts by Iraq, Jordan, and Sudan to make overtures towards Egypt. Once an inter-Arab consensus had been achieved, including a decision to readmit Egypt to the Arab League, the Saudis felt comfortable that they could improve their ties to Egypt. Saudi Arabia finally restored diplomatic relations with Egypt in November 1987. The renewed ties were affirmed during the Persian Gulf War, when Egypt sent a contingent of armed forces to Saudi Arabia to help defend the kingdom against an Iraqi attack. 

SOURCES-CR:
Brecher and Wilkenfeld, 1997, 324 Ba 331; Metz, 1992; Metz, 1990; 

PS-NARRATIVE: 

19370526-19570503 0.5

Saudi Arabia became a part of the international system on May 20, 1927. Egypt re-entered the international system on May 26, 1937. On October 10, 1943, Sheik Youssef Yassin, private secretary and Foreign Minister of King Ibn Saud of Saudi Arabia made an official visit to Cairo where he met with Egyptian Premier Mustafa Nahas Pasha. The goal of the talks was the establishment of a Pan-Arab state. On January 7, 1946, King Ibn Saud made an official visit to Egypt where he met with King Farouk and discussed more issues regarding pan-Arabism. On June 11, 1954, Egypt and Saudi Arabia have agreed to pool their resources in war industries, armaments, defense and military training. On October 22, 1955, Egypt and Saudi Arabia signed a defense pact. The treaty was signed by Premier Nasser and Emir Feisal al-Saud, Crown Prince and Foreign Minister of Saudi Arabia. Under its terms, Egypt and Saudi Arabia agreed to regard an attack on either as an attack on both and each undertook to refuse to conclude peace or any other agreement with an attacking country without the consent of the other party. The treaty provides for a supreme council composed of the defense and foreign ministers of both countries, a permanent war council of the joint chiefs of staff of both countries, and a permanent joint command under a single commander in chief. On April 21, 1956, Egyptian Premier Nasser signed a defense pact with the kings of Yemen and Saudi Arabia. The three-way pact welded together Arab opposition to any British possessions in the Arab Peninsula. It also aimed to strengthen the Arab defense of the Red Sea.

19570504-19620930 0.25

On May 4, 1957, a plot to kill Saudi Arabia's king was linked to the Egyptian military attache in Riyadh. Nasser said that he did not know anything about it. On March 5, 1958, Syria accused Saudi Arabia of organizing a plot to assassinate Egypt's leader, Nasser. King Saud of Saudi Arabia described the Egypt-Syrian union as Egyptian imperialism and has sworn that this union will not take place. On January 26, 1962, the relations between the United Arab Republic and Saudi Arabia were at a low point. A formal diplomatic break of the relations was expected soon. Nasser's veering toward socialism was seen as a major problem for Saudi Arabia's main ally, the United States. Cairo's relations with Saudi Arabia became significantly worse ever since Syria's secession from the United Arab Republic in September 1961. The Saudis accused Nasser that his teachings of socialism are against the teaching of the Prophet Muhammed, who respected the right of private ownership. They also accused Egypt for owing them 15 million US dollars.

19670515-20159999 0.5

On August 31, 1967, Egypt and Saudi Arabia signed an agreement to end the war in Yemen. Following the Six Days War and the end of the Yemeni war, Saudi Arabia provided a significant amount of financial help to Egypt. On June 26, 1971, Egyptian president Sadat and Saudi Arabia's King Faisal discussed the creation of a new and revitalized anti-Israeli Arab coalition. A few months before the October 1973 war against Israel, Saudi Arabia and Egypt established an axis of cooperation. Saudi Arabia provided close to $3 billion USD of financial support to Egypt from 1973 to 1977. On August 7, 1974, King Faisal announced that it would give 300 million USD of financial aid to Egypt. On July 20, 1975, King Khalid of Saudi Arabia ended a five days official visit to Cairo where he met with his Egyptian counter-part, President Sadat. The King endorsed Cairo's threat to the United Nations to block the renewal of the UN peacekeepers mandate. The King also pledged $600 million in credits to the Egyptian Central Bank and said Saudi Arabia will contribute funds to building low-income houses for industrial workers at Helwan.

Egyptian President Anwar Sadat, in a wide-ranging defense of his policies, declared on July 17, 1977, that Saudi Arabia has agreed to pay all the costs of the development of Egypt's armed forces. Addressing a stormy meeting in Cairo of the Arab Socialist Union-watchdog of Egypt's three political parties-Sadat also reported new details of his quarrel with the Soviet Union. He said that high level efforts at rapprochement have failed and that Moscow has canceled all military contracts with Cairo. That the Saudis have contributed several billion dollars to Egypt is well known but a commitment of the Kind, Sadat described is something new. Sadat gave no details his statement that the Saudis would pay to develop Egyptian armed forces was interpreted by some reporters in Cairo to mean that Saudi Arabia will pay the cost of new weapons Egypt needs. Saudi support of Egypt is believed to have been a major contributing factor to Sadat's decision early last year to terminate his military part with the Soviet Union and to cancel Moscow's naval base rights. Sadat's close relations with the United States following the 1973 Middle East war were another fundamental factor in his quarrel with Moscow. On the eve of the Washington visit by Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin. Sadat reiterated his view that Israeli occupation of Arab territory taken in the 1967 war must end. It is "inconceivable" that there can be "peace with occupation," he said. Sadat said Egypt is read to sign an agreement that would "end the state of war politically and legally." He added. "For the first time in its history. Israel's legal existence within its borders will be recognized. This will ultimately lead to one result: namely, that if Israel adheres to the principles of international law, it will become one of the Middle East states that will live in peace." In the domestic political forum, where he was heckled several times. Sadat did not repeat the statement he made to visiting U.S. congressmen earlier in the week that he would be willing to establish diplomatic and trade relations with Israel five years after a peace agreement. Nor did he repeat his strongly negative remarks, quoted by a Lebanese magazine, suggesting that normal relations with Israel are out of the question for the foreseeable future. According to news service reports of Sadat's three-hour address, which was broadcast live by Cairo domestic radio, the Egyptian leader said he obtained the commitment from Saudi Arabia last year. "It undertook for the next five years to develop the armed forces without us paying a penny," Sadat said. Sadat reported for the first time on what happened last month when in an attempt to repair the breach with the Soviet Union. Egyptian Foreign Minister Ismael Fahmi went to Moscow. Sadat said the Soviet Union demanded that be sign a new political agreement or issue a joint statement with Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev after approval of the text in treaty-like fashion by the Egyptian Parliament. He said Soviet officials declared that previous contracts to supply arms were wood and that in the future Egypt would have to pay in hard currency even for spare parts. They behaved "rudely and adopted a very hard line," he said. Sadat said the Soviets demanded that they not be excluded from any future Middle East settlement. He also said the Soviets told him they were backing Ethiopia in the face of a coming attack from Sudan. He said the Soviets were told in response "We are with Sudan and if anything is committed against Sudan, we will enter the battle with all our might." President Sadat's announcement that Saudi Arabia would finance the development of Egypt's armed forces over the next five years raises several questions. The main one is whether he means the total military budget or just the purchase of new weapons. In either case, Saudi Arabia has made a multibillion-dollar commitment to keep Sadat afloat. At least 35 per cent of Egypt's budget goes for military expenditures, ranging from salaries for ordinary soldiers to repayment of billions in hard-currency debt to the Soviet Union. If the Saudis are going to pick that all up, it could mean the salvation of a country in desperate economic trouble. Another question is what the Saudis got in return. The answer may lie in Sadat's abrupt retreat from his refusal to consider recognition of Israel, or normal trade and commercial relations with Israel, as part of any peace agreement. After saying no for months, he said last week that establishment of relations might be possible in five years after signing a peace treaty. The switch could be a reflection of Saudi pressure to make concessions in the search for a settlement. It is possible that merely keeping Sadat in power is enough of a return on investment for the Saudis. With Sadat spearheading resistance to communism in the Red Sea region and the Horn of Africa, the Saudis are eager to keep him in office and to help him put down radical opponents. The fact that Sadat was heckled during his speech by members of an organization known for its submissiveness may be symptomatic of the malaise that afflicts Egypt, occasionally spilling over into anti-government violence. The speech should dispel any lingering doubts about the finality of Egypt's split with the Soviet Union and its move into the anti-Communist conservative camp supported by the Saudis. Thus Sadat finds himself in several positions that would have been unthinkable for an Egyptian leader a few years ago-bound financially and politically to Saudi Arabia, and committed to opposing leftist regimes in Africa.

On December 9, 1978, the relations between Egypt and Saudi Arabia have chilled perceptibly since the Saudis participated in an Arab summit conference that condemned the Camp David agreements. Differences over policy and money have combined with personal pique to create an atmosphere of irritation in both countries. The divergence between Egypt, the Arab world's biggest country and greatest military power, and Saudi Arabia, which exerts great economic and religious influence on other Arab states, has wider implications than most of the parochial disputes that frequently set Arab against Arab. It is at least partly responsible for Egypt's determined approach to remaining issues in peace negotiations with Israel, reliable sources here say. The Egyptians believe the Saudis are partly to blame for the refusal of Jordan and the Palestine Liberation Organization to endorse the negotiating process set up at Camp David. Outsiders tend to view Egyptian-Saudi relations in apocalyptic terms, often asking whether Saudi Arabia will cut off its economic aid to Egypt. But the political minuet is subtler than that. Saudi Arabia was reducing its financial aid to Egypt well before Camp David, just as Egypt was reducing its dependence on Saudi assistance. The two countries are linked by spiritual ties that go back centuries and neither is likely to anything irretrievable or strike at the other in any dramatic way. It appears to be more a matter of going in the same direction by different routes. The Saudis did not like the Egyptian assumption that where Cairo led Saudi Arabia would inevitably follow, and the Egyptians resent Saudi refusal to endorse President Anwar Sadat's policies. Sadat is reliably reported to be personally annoyed at Crown Prince Fahd, who he feels went back on his word at the Baghdad summit conference and caved in to the demands of Arab hard-liners to denounce the Camp David agreements and impose economic and political sanctions on Egypt. Ignoring the pressures on the Saudis from Syria, Iraq and other opponents of Sadat who also have strong ties to Riyadh, the Egyptians question why it was necessary for Fahd to participate personally in the first place. Two weeks ago, according to authoritative sources, Sadat refused even to receive a conciliatory message from Fahd, leading some of his close advisers to suggest that he cool off. He later said the Saudis "allowed themselves to be dragged by the emotionalists and auctioneers in the Arab world," such as Libya and Iraq, and suggested Saudi policy would be different if the late King Faisal were still alive and ruling the kingdom. Anis Mansour, a journalist who often speaks for Sadat, wondered in print if Saudi Arabia had "turned to the Soviets and become a member of the Warsaw PACT." That expressed in blunt terms the Egyptian argument-aimed at playing on Saudi fears of communism and radical insurgents-that by refusing to endorse the Camp David accord the Saudis are playing into the hands of the Soviet Union. The Saudis have let it be known that they resent this treatment, which they view as unwarranted. Diplomats and journalists who have visited Saudi Arabia recently found many Saudis unusually outspoken about their irritation with Egypt. Egyptian officials have sought to minimize the degree of strain between this country and Saudi Arabia. They argue that Egypt and Saudi Arabia have so many common interests that transitory disputes will be over-riden, which may underestimate Saudi displeasure at the failure of Sadat's program to deal with such sensitive issues as the future of Jerusalem. "It's a family quarrel," said acting Foreign Minister Boutros Ghali in an interview. "It will be worked out. Egypt and Saudi Arabia have a kind of special relationship..." Sayed Marei, a member of Sadat's inner circle who was sent on an explanatory mission to Saudi Arabia after Camp David, acknowledged that "there are differences," but he also insisted that "they will be worked out." But the differences have been accumulating. Egypt believed the Saudis would put more money into the $2 billion Gulf organization for the development of Egypt when the original fund was used up last spring, but the Saudis did not. Then came Saudi Arabia's refusal to meet the asking price for 50 F5 combat jets that Egypt is buying from the United States. Delivery of the first of the planes was scheduled for last month but has been held up because of a dispute over who will make up the difference between the estimated cost, about $730 million, and what the Saudis have agreed to pay, about $500 million. A Cairo newspaper said this week that the Saudis now have decided to put up the rest of the money, but reports from the kingdom itself and defense officials in Washington say this is untrue. After the problems with the plane sale came the chilly Saudi response to the results of Camp David and then the Baghdad summit in which all the Arabs adopted a resolution that refrained from naming Egypt but condemned unilateral action by any Arab state on the Palestinian question as "impermissible." Saudi participation in a multibillion dollar fund reportedly set up there to support Syria, Jordan and the PLO was described by one high-ranking Egyptian as "a message to them that peace does not pay." The Saudis see the outcome of Baghdad differently. All participants accepted a resolution that "affirmed" the support of the Arabs for "a just peace," based on complete Israeli withdrawal from territories occupied in the 1967 war. The Saudis have said, and many independent observers agree, that this formula implies acceptance of Israel's right to exist and is close approximation of U.N. Security Council Resolution 242. By inducing Iraq, Algeria and the other radicals to accept that, they say, the Saudis actually nudged the other Arabs significantly closer to Sadat's position. Taking their cue from Sadat, Egyptian officials brush aside any suggestion that this country's negotiating stance in the talks with Israel was hardened or toughened in response to Baghdad, but in private they acknowledge that this was the case. "After Baghdad," one said, "Sadat had to show that he was not in too much of a hurry, that he was not a little stooge of the U.S. who committed the Arabs to less than the best deal available."

Egypt has broken off diplomatic relations with Kuwait and Saudi Arabia as of April 23, 1979, in retaliation for their severance of relations with Egypt, an Egyptian foreign ministry source said. He added that Kuwait has chosen Malaysia to look after its interests in Egypt and Saudi Arabia has chosen Pakistan. It was learned that Egypt will choose a friendly country to look after its interests in Kuwait and Saudi Arabia.

President Anwar Sadat, in an unexpectedly caustic attack on Egypt's largest benefactor, charged on May 2, 1979, that Saudi Arabia paid off other Arab nations to sever diplomatic relations with Cairo in protest of the peace treaty with Israel. Sadat's sharp criticism, in a May Day speech at the Red Sea town of Safaga, seemed startling because his harsh words raised the risk of economic reprisal from the Saudi rulers whose largesse has been an important factor in keeping the Egyptian economy afloat. Sadat's remarks, broadcast on Egyptian radio and relayed by news agencies, reflected growing irritation at the hostile reaction his peace initiatives-culminating in the treaty signed March 26-have generated throughout the Arab world. Sixteen Arab countries and the Palestine Liberation Organization have broken relations with Cairo after the peace moves, leaving only Sudan, Oman, North Yemen and Somalia with ties from among the 21 Arab League members besides Egypt. Sadat suggested that some governments that broke off ties with Egypt were reluctant to do so but were seduced into opposition to the treaty by promises of a cut of Saudi Arabia's oil wealth. He accused the Saudi government led by King Khalid and Crown Prince Fahd of "rushing after Arab countries to sever diplomatic relations with Egypt." Some of those that did, he added, made the decision "as a gesture of courtesy to Saudi Arabia, or were paid the price by Saudi Arabia." "This is something for which they shall have to pay dearly, and I am not referring to money," Sadat said. Several countries have informed Egypt secretly that they followed the tide of Arab criticism only because of Saudi influence and asked for understanding, the Egyptian president said. He named none of the countries. Saudi Arabia's wealth and prestige, however, long have given the kingdom a preponderant voice in Arab councils. For this reason, Saudi Arabia's announcement that it was breaking diplomatic relations with Egypt in line with Arab decisions to oppose the treaty was greeted with some concern in the United States. Despite the Saudis' consistent skepticism on the treaty, the Carter administration was hoping for at least passive acceptance of Sadat's peacemaking. It was noted then, however, that the Saudi announcement said nothing about ending economic assistance. Egyptian Defense Minister Kamal Hassan Ali estimated recently that Saudi Arabia has been contributing roughly $1.5 billion a year to Egypt through a variety of channels. In particular, Saudi Arabia has pledged to pay for 50 F5E jet fighters the United States has agreed to sell Egypt, originally priced at $523 million but since said to have gone up. Sadat said Saudi Arabia's diplomatic break "has no importance." But he hinted that Saudi and other Arab aid sources may change their minds about financial assistance. "Arab aid to Egypt is minimal but we will reconsider our calculations," he contended, adding that Suez Canal revenues and oil sales from Sinai fields to be recovered from Israel will make up any aid losses. Whatever inconvenience this might cause, he said, Egypt will persevere in its commitment to carry out the peace treaty with Israel. "Every time Israel takes one step forward, we shall encourage her and take two steps forward," Sadat said in the address, which lasted nearly two hours. "I tell Saudi Arabia: Egypt will not go back. The peace process will not go back. The peace process will not stop under any circumstances. The business of severing relations will not impede us. It will not affect Egypt's prestige leadership, strength and economy." Sadat also renewed his ridicule of hard-line Arab opponents such as the leaders of Libya, Iraq and Syria. As he has before, he referred to them as "dwarfs," and, in a new addition to his vocabulary of denunciations, as buzzards." For Col. Muammar Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, he reserved his favorite: "the Libyan lunatic." Such talk has become familiar in speeches against his most outspoken opponents. Sadat's tactic ever since his trip to Jerusalem in November 1977 has been to meet criticism from fellow Arabs with even stronger criticism. But the accusations against Saudi Arabia were something new. The Riyadh government's role as donor and its reluctance to openly criticize Sadat had previously immunized it from Sadat's pique. Saudi agreement to the Arab boycott of Egypt decided March 31 at the Arab conference at Baghdad apparently changed that. Another possible cause of Sadat's tough attitude was an announcement by Kuwait's foreign minister, Sheik Sabah Ahmad that Sudan was wavering in its support of Egypt. Similar claims have come from Libya. But nothing has emerged from Sudan itself and President Jaafar Nimeri is reported to remain staunchly with Sadat. At the same time, some members of the Sudanese government are known to feel nervous about their isolated stand and the Kuwaiti and Libyan announcements were seen as attempts to enhance and magnify their doubts. In Tehran, meanwhile, the Iranian Foreign Ministry went along as expected, with an order by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini and severed relations with Egypt, citing the peace treaty with Israel.

President Anwar Sadat made an impassioned plea on September 30, 1981 for the sale of American AWACS radar planes to Saudi Arabia, a country he described as America's best friend in the Middle East. Sadat's defense of the proposed $8.5 billion arms sale to Saudi Arabia was made on the eve of the departure of Vice President Hosni Mobarak to Washington with an ''important message'' from the Egyptian leader to President Reagan. Sadat, who was addressing the concluding session of a three-day congress of his ruling National Democratic Party, warned Libyan President Moammar Khadafy that any attack on Sudan,Egypt's neighbor to the south, will be confronted by Egypt immediately. Sadat also said Saudi Arabia has conspired against Egypt ever since he launched his bid for peace with Israel at the end of 1977. ''They are conspiring today and will be conspiring tomorrow. ''But I declare that Saudi Arabia has all the right to get the AWACS planes,'' he said. ''Otherwise, a very big question will be raised about how America is treating its best friend. ''If Saudi Arabia is not speaking up, I will speak up,'' he said. Explaining Saudi Arabia's friendly actions toward the west, Sadat said the kingdom refused to raise oil prices at the last OPEC conference and engineered a glut on the oil market ''so that attempts at blackmail may not be made by the likes of Khadafy.'' Saudi Arabia, he said, has deposited billions of petrodollars in American banks. ''If these billions were withdrawn, the American economy, the strongest in the world, would be shaken,'' he said. ''If this is what Saudi Arabia is doing (to help America), why shouldn't it get the AWACS?'' Sadat asked. ''For the sake of Israel?'' Sadat said the AWACS constituted no threat to Israel's security. ''If Saudi Arabia does not get them, a big question mark will be made about how the American decision is taken, about how America's best friend in the region is treated,'' he said. ''I am not saying this because I want something from Saudi Arabia,'' he said. ''Relations between us are broken off.''

The Egyptian president Hosni Mubarak flew to Saudi Arabia on June 14, 1982, to express condolences on the death of King Khaled ibn Abdul Aziz. It is the first time an Egyptian president has visited Saudi Arabia since diplomatic relations between Egypt and Saudi Arabia were severed in 1979. The visit also comes at a time when Egypt and other Arab countries are gradually improving relations. The Egyptian newspaper al Akhbar said in an article today that Mubarak's visit is "an expression of all Egypt's feelings toward the people of Saudi Arabia. Misunderstanding between Saudi Arabia and Egypt is only a summer's cloud that will not shake the historical bonds between the two countries based on true brotherhood, honest cooperation and a common destiny." Mubarak was accompanied by deputy premier and minister of oil Ahmed Ezzeddin Hilal and minister of defense Abdel Halim abu Ghazallah.

President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt flew to Cairo on June 15, 1982, for the first meeting of Saudi and Egyptian leaders since Saudi Arabia and most other Arab countries broke ties with Cairo in 1979 to protest its peace treaty with Israel. The official Saudi press agency said President Mubarak met with King Fahd, the new ruler, to offer condolences over the death of King Khalid of a heart attack. Earlier in the day, the new King, who has vowed to continue the country's foreign, domestic and oil policies, received pledges of loyalty today from Saudi princes, military officers, tribal leaders and others. The meeting between King Fahd and President Mubarak was regarded in Riyadh as the most significant in a series of contacts the 59-yearold King had with Arabs arriving to express condolences. The Saudi news agency did not say whether Mr. Mubarak's talks with the King covered other issues, but diplomats said a likely subject was the possibility of bringing Egypt back into Arab ranks-an issue that has split the 21 Arab countries. All Arab countries except the Sudan, Oman and Somalia imposed political and economic sanctions on Egypt after President Anwar el-Sadat broke Arab ranks to make peace with Israel. After the meeting today, which Egyptian reports said was friendly and lasted an hour and 15 minutes, President Mubarak returned to Cairo. He has visited only Oman and the Sudan among the Arab countries since he became President last October, after the assassination of President Sadat. Morocco's Foreign Minister, M'hamed Boucetta, visited Cairo recently in the first sign of an easing of the Arab boycott. Among the leaders to meet King Fahd today were President Mohammed Siad Barre of Somalia and President Gaafar al-Nimeiry of the Sudan. Sultan Qabus bin Said of Oman also came here. The question of restoring ties with Egypt, the Arab world's most populous country and the one widely regarded as its natural leader, was given added urgency by Israel's invasion of Lebanon last week. Conservative Arab countries in the Persian Gulf have hinted that the time is ripe to mend fences with Cairo, but radicals led by Syria are demanding that Egypt first renounce the peace treaty with Israel. Saudi Arabia has said that any major decision, such as resuming formal ties with Egypt, must be collective. Shops were closed in Riyadh today and traffic was light. There was no official declaration of mourning.

Sheikh Ahmed Zaki Yamani, Saudi Arabia's oil minister, became the first leader from his nation to visit Egypt in five years on October 2, 1984, when he arrived to discuss ways to stop the decline of world oil prices. Yamani said his one-day visit was as a ''representative of OPEC'' rather than of Saudi Arabia and said he was confident the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries would keep the international sales price for crude oil at about $29 per barrel. He will meet with President Hosni Mubarak. Yamani was the first Saudi cabinet member to visit Egypt since Saudi Arabia and 16 other Arab countries broke off relations with Cairo in protest over Egypt's 1979 peace treaty with Israel. A crack in that solidarity appeared last week when Jordan announced it will restore relations with Egypt. Saudi Arabia was critical of Jordan, saying it broke the Arab consensus. But the Saudis also praised Egypt and underlined the importance of its return to the Arab fold. Political observers in Egypt said Yamani's visit to Egypt, despite its business nature, indicated a further relaxation of the Arab boycott on Cairo. Asked to comment on Egyptian-Saudi relations, Yamani said: ''We are all brothers.'' Egypt produces 900,000 barrels of oil daily, a third of which is exported. It is not an OPEC member. Cairo has kept the price of its best variety stable at $28 per barrel for the past seven months. Its refusal to undercut prices was met with appreciation by OPEC members and Sheikh Maneh El-Otiba, oil minister of the United Arab Emirates, who visited Egypt in August to convey gratitude. Egyptian Minister of Petroleum Abdel-Hadi Kandil announced last month that Egypt's policy was to ''stabilize the prices of its petroleum because we are not only looking after our own interest but also seek to save the oil market from collapsing.'' ''The collapse of the market is bound to harm Egypt,'' he said.

On February 12, 1986, a key member of the Saudi Arabian royal family called for a summit between President Hosni Mubarak and Saudi King Fahd to end Egypt's near ostracism in the Arab world since its 1979 peace treaty with Israel. Prince Torki bin Abdel-Aziz, described as Fahd's brother and a former defense official, told the weekly magazine Al Mussawar, ''There is no substitute to a meeting between Fahd and Mubarak. ''We should all work to make it happen as soon as possible, because any further delay is unadvisable.'' ''I think nothing now would obstruct this meeting, particularly in view of the good will of the two leaders,'' he said. Saudi Arabia led the majority of Arab states in breaking off relations with Egypt in 1979 to protest its peace treaty with Israel under President Anwar Sadat, who was assassinated by Islamic extremists in 1981. Egypt also was expelled from the Arab League and the Islamic Conference Organization. Although Egypt's relations with many Arab states, notably Iraq and the Persian Gulf states, improved greatly under Mubarak, only Jordan took the step of resuming diplomatic ties officially. Torki denied reports in Cairo that branded Saudi Arabia as the obstacle preventing the official resumption of ties between Egypt and Arab states. ''We had hoped that the initiative would have come from some other party,'' he said, ''but nobody has the right to dump his responsibilities on Saudi Arabia.'' He said Saudi Arabia did not oppose Egypt's return to the Islamic Conference Organization at the beginning of 1984. ''So why should our position be different now?'' he asked. Torki described Saudi-Egyptian relations as a ''strategic necessity for the security of the two countries and the balanced progress of the Arab world.'' Torki also denied rumors that Saudi Arabia was providing support to underground Islamic groups opposing the Egyptian government. ''This is not true at all, because we reject extremism and refuse to interfere in the domestic affairs of other countries,'' he said.

Saudi Arabia announced on November 16, 1986, that it had resumed full diplomatic relations with Egypt, becoming the seventh Arab country to do so in the last six days. The Saudi press agency said the announcement followed the weekly Cabinet meeting presided over by King Fahd. Saudi Arabia said it took the action to bolster Arab solidarity. The move followed a decision by the Arab League last week to let individual countries decide on their own relations with Egypt. Most Arab countries broke ties after Egypt's 1979 peace treaty with Israel. Bahrain also resumed its ties with Egypt today. Countries that had already done so were Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, Yemen, Morocco and Iraq. Diplomats said Qatar would follow suit after its weekly Cabinet meeting.

On January 10, 1988, President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt made an official visit to King Fahd in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. It was the first visit by an Egyptian head of state to Saudi Arabia since Egypt's 1979 peace treaty with Israel. King Fahd of Saudi Arabia will visit Cairo soon, according to Egypt's Middle East News Agency on May 10, 1988. It will be the first visit to Egypt by a Saudi monarch in more than a decade. Western officials in Cairo see the forthcoming visit as another indication of moderate Arab states seeking to forge stronger links with Egypt after a freeze in relations. Most Arab countries, including Saudi Arabia, suspended diplomatic ties with Egypt after it had signed the 1979 peace treaty with Israel. Relations between Egypt and Saudi Arabia were soured during the last year's of late President Anwar Sadat's rule. Mr Sadat, who was assassinated in 1981, publicly insulted the Saudi royal family on several occasions after Saudi Arabia suspended relations. An Arab League summit in Amman last November freed member states to resume full diplomatic relations with Egypt. Most Arab countries had retained interest sections in Cairo. No date for King Fahd's visit were announced, but diplomats here speculate that it may precede a planned emergency Arab League summit due to be held in Algiers at the end of the first week of June. The summit has been called to shore up Arab support for the Palestinian uprising in the West Bank and Gaza Strip now in its sixth month. While the Amman summit was dominated by the moderate Arabs preoccupied about the threat of Iran and the Gulf War, the Algiers gathering-if it takes place-is likely to see the militants such as Syria play a stronger role. President Mubarak of Egypt visited Saudi Arabia on a Gulf tour in January. King Fahd's visit to Egypt would be reciprocal.

Egypt has begun sending tanks, artillery, and anti-aircraft missiles to back up its troops in Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states, Western and Egyptian military sources said on August 22, 1990. Military sources said Egypt has so far sent 5,000 troops, mainly crack Ranger battalions and paratroops, to Saudi Arabia as well as anti-aircraft missiles to the United Arab Emirates. More than 100,000 United States and other foreign troops are on their way to or are already based in Saudi Arabia to help protect the kingdom against any Iraqi attack. ''If the Iraqis were to attack, they'd go for the Egyptian positions because they are the weakest in terms of firepower,'' said a Western military observer based in the region. ''That's why they have asked friendly countries to help them move artillery and armor to the Gulf.''

On October 24th 1990, Saudi Information Minister Shaykh Ali al-Sha'ir has said that Saudi Arabia is considering buying Egypt's debts. In an exclusive interview for Friday's edition [26th October] of 'Al-Musawwar', Sha'ir said that Egypt has never asked Saudi Arabia to forgive its debts, which is, he added, an indication of Egypt's greatness and mettle. Egypt and Saudi Arabia share identical views towards the current issues under debate and are gravely concerned and angry at the shedding of innocent Palestinian blood, said Saudi Foreign Minister Prince Sa'ud al-Faysal in Cairo on 10 March, 2002. Cairo and Riyadh are also in agreement on the need to raise the Saudi peace initiative to the upcoming Arab summit in Beirut, he said, stressing the urgency for the formulation of a clear and united Arab position at the summit. We hope there will be a united and clear Arab position on this issue, he added. The Saudi initiative was examined before during lengthy talks between President Husni Mubarak and Saudi Crown Prince Abdallah, and the issue was re-examined at today's meeting, he said. Prince Sa'ud al Faysal was speaking to the press meeting President Mubarak and delivering a message to him from Saudi King Fahd Bin-Abd-al-Aziz and Crown Prince Abdallah. He is currently in Egypt to attend the 117th session of the Arab League Ministerial Council. Foreign Minister Ahmad Mahir and Saudi Ambassador to Egypt Ibrahim al-Sa'd al-Ibrahim attended the meeting with the president at this Red Sea resort. Arab countries have a sincere desire for permanent and comprehensive peace, at the same time, Israel is required to show its genuine intentions towards peace and abide by the implementation of UNSC Resolutions 242 and 338 and the Madrid terms of reference, namely the full withdrawal from Arab lands and the restoration of the Palestinian legitimate rights including the establishment of the independent Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital, he said. If Israel does so, Arab countries will give Israel complete peace, he added.

On November 30, 1995 President Hosni Mubarak has praised the support and assistance extended to Egypt by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and stressed that the Kingdom is one of the countries which support Egypt during hardships. In an interview with Egyptian television last night, President Mubarak said there were 1.2 million Egyptians working in Saudi Arabia in various fields, "and if one of them makes a mistake (and get punished), it does not mean that Saudi Arabia does not treat people well." He added that it was not polite to make a big case of a single incident because this would affect bilateral relations, "unless the writer has another goal instigated by another party." Commenting on the phenomenon of terrorism in Egypt, he said it has greatly declined as a result of the huge efforts exerted by security agencies. He added that trying civilians at military courts was within the law and that such measures are only taken in emergency cases to guarantee a swift action. The Egyptian leader ruled out the possibility of a cabinet reshuffle after the parliamentary elections and pointed out that making frequent changes in the government would lead to instability in the country.

Egypt's President Hosni Mubarak arrived in Saudi Arabia on February 10, 1996 to perform the Muslim pilgrimage to Mecca and hold talks with Saudi leaders. Mubarak was received upon arrival by Prince Majid, the Governor of the Mecca Province, and Saudi Foreign Minister Prince Saud al Faisal. He proceeded to Mecca to perform the pilgrimage wearing the traditional white Ihram robes. Egyptian sources said Mubarak would meet with Saudi King Fahd and Crown Prince Abdullah during his brief stay in the kingdom. Fahd is currently convalescing in Mecca. The king, who has appointed Abdullah as acting ruler, recently began receiving visitors for the first time since he was taken ill and hospitalized last November.

Saudi Crown Prince Abdullah bin Abdul-Aziz arrived on June 3, 1997 in Cairo for talks with Egyptian President Hosny Mubarak. The national Middle East News Agency said the talks would deal with bilateral relations and current developments in the Middle East.

On December 22, 2003, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, and Egypt have discussed cooperation in the field of defense. The matter came under discussion at meetings between the vice-chief of army staff, General Mohammad Yousaf Khan, and the military commanders of the brotherly countries during his 12-day official visit to Egypt and Saudi Arabia. Views and perceptions were also shared on the security of the regional and global situation. The vice-chief of army staff has now returned home.

Egypt and Saudi Arabia agreed on 28 December 2003, to overcome within three months all standing barriers that hamper trade exchange. After meeting with Saudi Minister of Trade and Industry Hashim Abdallah Yamani today, Egyptian Minister of Foreign Trade and Economy Yusuf Butrus Ghali said the two sides agreed to form a working team to be co-chaired by himself and Yamani to meet every six months in tandem or whenever it is necessary. They agreed also to forge a mechanism of cooperation to follow up flow of commodities and address any commercial or non-commercial obstacles that might pop up. Ghali invited Yamani to visit Egypt and attend 37th Cairo International Trade Fair, to be held on 16 to 26 March, 2004. A joint statement released after the two sides' meeting on Sunday said the achievement of the previous goals is based on five major factors. First, thrashing out a clear dispute-settling mechanism; Second, consulting before taking any decisions that might affect flow of commodities to the two sides; Third, drawing out programmes for development and encouraging trade exchange; Fourth, taking all measures that would boost stability and credibility off the policies that govern trade between the two sides; and fifth avoiding use of media campaigns as means of complicating or escalating any disputes. The two sides also agreed to coordinate stances regarding unfair practices in the field of international trade such as the problem of dumping.

On 24 February 2004 in Cairo, King Fahd Bin-Abd-al-Aziz and Crown Prince Abdallah Bin-Abd-al-Aziz, the deputy premier and commander of the National Guard held talks with Egypt's President Muhammad Husni Mubarak, focusing on international, regional, Arab and Islamic issues and bilateral relations between the two countries. A joint statement was issued here today at the end of President Mubarak's visit to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in response to an invitation from King Fahd. The leaders of the two countries stressed that Arab countries are proceeding on the track of development, modernization and reform in agreement with the interests of their peoples, values, meeting of their needs, characteristics and Arab identity, and are rejecting the imposition of a certain reformist pattern on Arab and Islamic countries from abroad, the statement said. They noted that the concern of achieving stability in the Middle East necessitates finding a just and fair solution to the issues of Arab and Islamic countries topped by Palestine and Iraq. They agreed on a joint stand towards the reform of the Arab situation to be submitted to the next meeting of Arab foreign ministers in Cairo, Egypt. Discussing peace in the Middle East, the leaders agreed on the necessity of starting political discussions on the Palestinian and Syrian tracks that lead to a comprehensive settlement and contribute to defusing tension. They reaffirmed the necessity of activating the Arab peace initiative adopted by Arab Summit in Beirut in 2001 and exerting all efforts to activate it. The leaders emphasized the importance that the Palestinian government practices its responsibilities. On Iraq, the leaders reasserted Iraq's territorial integrity, respect of its sovereignty and independence and commitment to the principle of non-interference in its internal affairs. They stressed the right of the Iraqi people to their political self-determination and the form of their state by themselves. They also emphasized the importance of enhancing the role of the United Nations to shoulder its vital responsibilities during the transitional period to prepare situations for the withdrawal of occupation forces as soon as possible. They welcomed the decisions issued by Iraq's neighboring countries in Kuwait on February 14, 15 that affirmed the same principles. On bilateral relations, the leaders reviewed all aspects of political and economic relations. They agreed on exerting all efforts to enhance strong, firm and distinguished relations binding the two leaderships and their brotherly peoples.

Egypt and Saudi Arabia signed on 12 June 2005 a cooperation agreement in the education domain. Egyptian Education Minister Ahmad Jamal-al-Din Musa signed the agreement from the Egyptian side and his Saudi counterpart Abdallah Bin-Salah Bin-Ubayd signed for his country. The Egyptian minister asserted that the agreement came within the framework of brotherly ties binding Egypt and Saudi Arabia, referring to Saudi-Egyptian cooperation with the aim of developing the education process in both countries. On his part, the Saudi minister lauded the agreement, saying it would provide a chance for the two sides to exchange expertise in the education sphere. As per the agreement, necessary measures required to be adopted for seconding Egyptian teachers are to be facilitated. The agreement will also help boost cultural cooperation, especially as regards UNESCO activities, as well as public and regional conferences. Saudi Arabia will also benefit from the Egyptian expertise in building schools, together with school activities, scientific techniques, the eradication of illiteracy, adult education and education for those with special needs.

President Husni Mubarak received a message from King Abdallah Bin-Abd-al-Aziz of Saudi Arabia during a meeting with visiting Saudi Foreign Minister Sa'ud al-Faysal at the presidential headquarters on 8 September, 2005. The meeting was attended by Foreign Minister Ahmad Abu-al-Ghayt and Khalid al-Jandan, the chief of the Saudi Foreign Ministry's Arab Department. Prince Sa'ud told reporters after the meeting that the message he delivered to Mubarak carried Saudi Arabia's congratulations to Egypt over its first contested elections. He said the Egyptian elections dispel all doubts over Egypt's stability and its future. Egypt, God willing, will continue to enjoy its stable position in the heart of the Arab world and to lead the Arab nation from good to better, he said. The Saudi minister praised the constantly developing good relationship between the two countries.

PS-SOURCES: New York Times October 11, 1943, January 8, 1946, June 12, 1954, October 28, 1955, April 22, 1956, May 4 1957, March 6 1958, January 27 1962, September 1 1967, June 27 1971, August 8 1974, July 21 1975, June 15, 1982, November 17, 1987, January 10, 1988, Washington Post July 17, 1977, December 9, 1978, Christian Science Monitor August 22, 1990, Financial Times May 10, 1988, BBC October 26, 1990, October 29, 2001, March 10, 2002, December 22, 2003, December 28, 2003, February 24, 2004, June 12, 2005, September 8, 2005, Deutsche Presse-Agentur February 10, 1996, June 3, 1997, Moneyclips November 30, 1995, United Press International May 2, 1979, October 2, 1984, February 12, 1986, Xinhua April 24, 1979, June 14, 1982

MARITIME-MIDS:

MARITIME-DISPUTE:

Discussion:

SOURCES: Gibler, D.M. 2018. Militarized Interstate Dispute Narratives, 1816-2010. Langham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. 

Gibler, D. M., S. V. Miller, and E. K. Little. 2016. "An Analysis of the Militarized Interstate Dispute (MID) Dataset, 1816-2001." International Studies Quarterly. 60 (4): 719-730.
