FILE: cm652663v11.0.txt
DYAD: SYRIA-JORDAN
RIVALRY: RIV1251
DISPUTE(S): MID3161 MID607 MID3151 MID3171 MID1039 MID1081 MID3107 MID3106 

PS: 19460525-19520316 0.25 19520317-19570412 0.5 19570413-19851020 0.00 19851021-19860618 -9 19860619-20050226 0.25 20050227-20209999 0.5

PS-UPDATE2020:

PS-NOTES:

PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20220321
PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20220321

RIVNOTES: 
RIV1251: MID3957 removed in because does not appear in the COW dyadic 3.1 data or the Maoz 2.0 dyadic data. 


NARRATIVE-CM:
Prime Minister Husni Zaim of Syria closed the border with Jordan on April 26, 1949, but the border was re-opened on April 27, 1949. Some 5,000 Syrian troops entered northern Jordan on April 13, 1957. Jordan closed the border with Syria on April 24, 1957. Syrian troops completed their withdrawal from northern Jordan on May 26, 1957. Foreign Minister Samir al-Rifai of Jordan condemned Syria for anti-Jordanian propaganda on July 6, 1957. The US airlifted military assistance (weapons and ammunition) to Jordan from September 9 to October 6, 1957. The Jordanian government accused Syria of interfering in its domestic affairs on September 19, 1957. Jordan re-opened the border with Syria on October 27, 1957. Jordan closed the border with Syria on August 4, 1958 after several individuals were arrested for entering Jordan from Syrian territory with weapons and bombs. Jordan referred the matter to the *United Nations* (UN) Security Council on August 8, 1958. Syrian military aircraft attacked a Jordanian aircraft carrying King Hussein over Syria on November 10, 1958. Jordanian troops attacked several Syrian villages in April 1959. Syria opened its border with Jordan on July 31, 1959. Jordan accused Syria of involvement in a bombing in Amman on August 29, 1960, and Jordan deployed troops on the border with Syria. UN Special Envoy Pier Spinelli and *League of Arab States *(LAS) Secretary-General Abdul Hassouna mediated a cessation of the crisis on August 31-September 1, 1960. On May 23, 1967, Jordan severed diplomatic relations with Syria following the deaths of seven Jordanian soldiers and four Jordanian civilians near the border on May 21, 1967. Some 20,000 Syrian troops intervened in support of the *Palestinian Liberation Organization* (PLO) in northern Jordan on September 19, 1970. Jordan referred the matter to the LAS Council and requested military assistance from the US on September 19, 1970. The US placed its military forces in the region on alert. Secretary-of-State William Rogers of the US appealed to Syria to withdraw its troops from Jordan on September 20, 1970. On September 20, 1970, Israel threatened to militarily intervene in support of Jordan if Syrian troops were not immediately withdrawn. LAS heads-of-state established a four-member conciliation commission headed by President Numayri of Sudan on September 22, 1970. The Soviet Union called for the withdrawal of Syiran troops from Jordan on September 22, 1970. Syrian troops withdrew from Jordan on September 23, 1970. The LAS conciliation commission mediated a ceasefire agreement in Cairo on September 27, 1970, and the ceasefire went into effect on September 29, 1970. Some 750 Jordanian soldiers and 100 Syrian soldiers were killed during the conflict. Jordanian troops attacked PLO bases in Syria on August 11, 1971. Jordanian troops and Syrian troops clashed near the border on August 12-13, 1971, and Syria severed diplomatic relations with Jordan on August 12, 1971. Jordan and Syria resumed diplomatic relations on October 4, 1973. Jordanian and Syrian representatives signed a political and military agreement on August 22, 1975. Some 30,000 Syrian troops and 400 tanks were mobilized on the border with Jordan on November 25, 1980. Saudi Arabia attempted to mediate a cessation of the crisis on December 2-3, 1980. Syrian troops withdrew from the border. Jordanian troops and Syrian troops clashed near the border on February 22-24, 1982. In February 1982 there were 2 military incidents between Syria and Jordan. This has been learned from travelers who have arrived in Judaea and Samaria from Amman. On 24th February two Syrian helicopters attacked a Jordanian army observation post near the border of the two countries and Iraq and an armored vehicle was hit. Two days prior to that, the Syrians fired machineguns at a Jordanian patrol near the border pass in the Ramsa region. There was no damage and the travelers said the Jordanians censored the incidents. According to them, Jordan fears a worsening of the dispute with Syria. Last week it was learned that the two countries were expelling the military attaches and that Syria was cutting down its diplomatic staff in Amman.

King Hussein of Jordan accused Syria on November 5, 1983, of trying to destabilize his country and charged a shadowy Syrian-backed terrorist group was behind recent assassination attempts on two Jordanian ambassadors. In an interview with the Kuwaiti daily As Siyasah, Hussein predicted the Arab summit conference scheduled later this month in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, would not be convened. He said the meeting was being prevented because of Syria's moves ''to replace the current Palestinian leadership'' of Yasser Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization. Hussein accused Syria of sending the radical Palestinian group of Abu Nidal to assassinate his envoys to Rome and New Delhi Oct. 26 and 27. ''We also have information that Syria wants to create instability within Jordanian institutions, through the recruitment of some elements to carry out riots and terrorist acts,'' Hussein said. Abu Nidal in Damascus denied involvement in the shootings Monday. Credit was claimed by ''Arab Revolutionary Brigades'' who said they wanted Jordan to cancel plans for a U.S.-supported Jordanian rapid deployment force. U.S. officials say the United States is training up to 8,000 Jordanian soldiers for possible emergency deployment in the Persian Gulf area. Hussein told As Siyasah, ''to play the role of a rapid deployment force on behalf of a superpower is something I don't know about. When the need arises for the Jordanian army to be in the gulf, it will be there.'' Hussein said he would consider the gulf endangered if Iraq lost its war against the Islamic regime in Iran, but he thought ''this will not happen.'' Commenting on events in Lebanon, Hussein warned Syria that its policies would end with ''Israel in the south, Syria in the north and several mini-states between north and south. ''This is partition which Syria itself cannot survive,'' because both Lebanon and Syria have a similar factional mix, he said, hinting that instability in Lebanon could spread to Syria. Hussein said he was willing to restart talks with the PLO on President Reagan's plan for Palestinian autonomy in association with Jordan on the West Bank. ''The situation has become more complicated and should be taken into account by the PLO,'' he said, adding ''Jordan will not be a substitute homeland for the Palestinians.''

Jordanian troops attacked and killed two Syrian civilians near the border on February 23, 1985. Syria issued a protest to the Jordanian government on February 24, 1985.

SOURCES-CM: 
Brecher and Wilkenfeld, 1997, 637-638, 643-644, 651-652; Jessup, 1998, 365-369; *Keesing*, May 25-June 1, 1957, September 7-14, 1957, November 15-22, 1958, September 10-17, 1960, June 3-10, 1967; August 14-21, 1971, October 22-28, 1973, July 21-27, 1975, February 26, 1982, September 1983, May 1985; *Middle East Journal *(MEJ), Summer 1949, Summer 1957, Autumn 1957, Winter 1957, Autumn 1958, Winter 1970, Autumn 1971; Tillema, 1991, 181-183; Weisburd, 1997, 196-197.

NARRATIVE-CR:

Relations between Syria and Jordan were strained for several decades beginning with serious hostility in the late 1950s and subsiding in the late 1980s. In September 1970, a Syrian military unit crossed into Jordan to aid the Palestinian guerrillas who were fighting the Jordanian army. The Syrian force was repulsed, but relations remained tense and were severed in July 1971. Relations with Syria improved briefly following the October 1973 War, but deteriorated again by the late 1970s. Syria apparently feared Hussein's close ties with Washington would involve Jordan in the Camp David process. When religiously inspired disturbances broke out in Aleppo and other Syrian cities during the winter of 1979-80, the government immediately suspected-and accused-Jordan of complicity. In addition, Syria had a bitter rivalry with Iraq. Damascus perceived Amman's support of Iraq in that country's war with Iran as confirmation of conspiracy theories about Baghdad trying to encircle Syria. By the end of 1980, relations between Jordan and Syria had deteriorated to such an extent that military clashes appeared possible along the common border where both countries had massed troops. The escalating tension eventually was defused by Saudi Arabian diplomatic intervention, although relations remained strained. Jordan broke diplomatic relations with Syria in 1981, charging Damascus with plotting to assassinate its prime minister and kidnapping its ambassador to Lebanon. 

For the next five years, the two neighbors were estranged. Amman accused Syria of assisting radical Palestinian groups who carried out several political killings of Jordanian diplomats in Europe and the Middle East. 

Below I detail the actual MIDs between the two countries. 

MID3161 occurred From April through August of 1948. It involved Iraq and Syria versus Jordan. In this situation the Syrians and the Jordanians both claimed that the other state was attempting to annex part or all of the others territory in various merger discussions. The border between the two states was closed and tensions remained high throughout the dispute. The dispute ended in a stalemate. 

MID607 is called the Turkey/Syria dispute and occurred from April through November of 1957. It involved Jordan, Iraq, the US, and Turkey versus Syria, Egypt, and the USSR. Some 5,000 Syrian troops entered northern Jordan on April 13, 1957. Jordan closed the border with Syria on April 24, 1957. Syrian troops completed their withdrawal from northern Jordan on May 26, 1957. Foreign Minister Samir al-Rifai of Jordan condemned Syria for anti-Jordanian propaganda on July 6, 1957. The US airlifted military assistance (weapons and ammunition) to Jordan from September 9 to October 6, 1957. The Jordanian government accused Syria of interfering in its domestic affairs on September 19, 1957. Jordan re-opened the border with Syria on October 27, 1957. 

MID3151 occurred on March 5, 1958. Here there were suspicions in Damascus that Iraq and Jordan were attempting to encircle Syria as the Jordanians and the Iraqis created a federation of their two states. A Jordanian border patrol shelled a Syrian border post as a result of the tension over the issue. There were no other reported incidents of violence related to this episode of tension. 

MID3171 occurred from February through December of 1966. During this period Syria and Israel were involved in a row. PLO guerillas were initiating operations from within Syria against Israel. Israel retaliated against Syrian positions. At this point Syria was in a federated government with Egypt and Yemen-the UAR or United Arab Republic. There was discussion of deploying Egyptian troops to Syria to assist Syria in defending itself against Israel. This prompted reaction from King Hussein of Jordan. He felt his country would be threatened by the presence of Egyptian troops in Syria and that the UAR might have designs on annexation of Jordan. 

MID1039 occurred in September of 1970. After the Six Day War of 1967, the PLO began using Jordan as a base for operations versus Israel. Israel responded with raids against Jordan. Jordan wanted to deescalate the tension and began to suppress the PLO. In response the PLO attempted to topple King Hussein in September of 1970. The conflict escalated when Syrian troops entered Jordan in support of the PLO. 

MID1081 occurred from July through August of 1971. This event also concerned the lingering PLO activities from within Jordan and the Syrian attempt to continue their support of the PLO. 

MID3107 occurred from November of 1980 through January of 1981. This mid is titled, `Syrian pressure on Jordan.' During this period Syria was experiencing terrorist activity against the regime of President Assad. The Syrians blamed the Jordanians for supporting the Muslim Brotherhood and allowing it to operate from with Jordan. This was the immediate cause of the tension but the underlying cause was thought to be more related to increasing Syrian isolation in Arab politics. In December both states deployed about 30,000 troops to their mutual border which had been closed. The tension continued between the two countries and MID3106 occurred in late February of 1982. In this mid Syria attacked a Jordanian border position. 

There was considerable strain in the relations between the two countries until the mid 1980s. Tentative efforts to improve relations in 1983-84 were aborted by Syrian denunciation of Jordan's resumption of relations with Egypt. Finally, in the fall and winter of 1985-86, Saudi Arabia mediated reconciliation talks that led to a restoration of diplomatic ties. In May 1986, the Jordanian prime minister became the first high-ranking official from Amman to visit Syria since 1977. 

In February 1982 there were 2 military incidents between Syria and Jordan. This has been learned from travelers who have arrived in Judaea and Samaria from Amman. On 24th February two Syrian helicopters attacked a Jordanian army observation post near the border of the two countries and Iraq and an armored vehicle was hit. Two days prior to that, the Syrians fired machineguns at a Jordanian patrol near the border pass in the Ramsa region. There was no damage and the travelers said the Jordanians censored the incidents. According to them, Jordan fears a worsening of the dispute with Syria. Last week it was learned that the two countries were expelling the military attaches and that Syria was cutting down its diplomatic staff in Amman.

King Hussein of Jordan accused Syria on November 5, 1983, of trying to destabilize his country and charged a shadowy Syrian-backed terrorist group was behind recent assassination attempts on two Jordanian ambassadors. In an interview with the Kuwaiti daily As Siyasah, Hussein predicted the Arab summit conference scheduled later this month in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, would not be convened. He said the meeting was being prevented because of Syria's moves ''to replace the current Palestinian leadership'' of Yasser Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization. Hussein accused Syria of sending the radical Palestinian group of Abu Nidal to assassinate his envoys to Rome and New Delhi Oct. 26 and 27. ''We also have information that Syria wants to create instability within Jordanian institutions, through the recruitment of some elements to carry out riots and terrorist acts,'' Hussein said. Abu Nidal in Damascus denied involvement in the shootings Monday. Credit was claimed by ''Arab Revolutionary Brigades'' who said they wanted Jordan to cancel plans for a U.S.-supported Jordanian rapid deployment force. U.S. officials say the United States is training up to 8,000 Jordanian soldiers for possible emergency deployment in the Persian Gulf area. Hussein told As Siyasah, ''to play the role of a rapid deployment force on behalf of a superpower is something I don't know about. When the need arises for the Jordanian army to be in the gulf, it will be there.'' Hussein said he would consider the gulf endangered if Iraq lost its war against the Islamic regime in Iran, but he thought ''this will not happen.'' Commenting on events in Lebanon, Hussein warned Syria that its policies would end with ''Israel in the south, Syria in the north and several mini-states between north and south. ''This is partition which Syria itself cannot survive,'' because both Lebanon and Syria have a similar factional mix, he said, hinting that instability in Lebanon could spread to Syria. Hussein said he was willing to restart talks with the PLO on President Reagan's plan for Palestinian autonomy in association with Jordan on the West Bank. ''The situation has become more complicated and should be taken into account by the PLO,'' he said, adding ''Jordan will not be a substitute homeland for the Palestinians.''

On July 22, 1984, after years of coolness and conflict, there were signs that relations between Jordan and Syria have turned for the better. The latest example was the meeting in Damascus in June 1984 between the Syrian president Hafez Assad and the speaker of Jordan's House of Representatives Akef al Fayez, who went there to attend the meeting of Arab parliaments. Observers here took the event as another major step toward improving relations between the two countries following an exchange of goodwill messages between king Hussein of Jordan and president Assad in late June marking the end of the Muslim fasting month of Ramadan. Differences among the Arab frontline countries have caused losses to them. now, more and more Arab leaders have come to realize that such a state of affairs should not go on any longer. As far as Jordan and Syria are concerned, bilateral trade developed and the jointly-run factories remained in operation even when their relations were on the ebb. The Jordanian government issued an order early this year demanding a stop of press attacks on Syria. Following that, King Hussein said in May 1984 that Syria is entitled to participate in any peace process for the settlement of the Middle East problems and promised that Jordan will take actions if Syria is invaded by Israel. Relations between Jordan and the PLO used to be a major factor affecting Jordanian-Syrian relations. However, Syria has taken a new posture this year and has stopped its attacks on talks between Jordan and the PLO. The PLO, while holding negotiations with Jordan, also tried to ease its tension with Syria, with Jordan's encouragement and support. All the three countries which form the major part of the region, expressed the common desire to narrow their differences. Though there is still a long way toward comprehensive reconciliation between Jordan and Syria, a new sign of unity has emerged and this is favorable to the just cause of the Arab nations.

The rapprochement with Syria took place late in 1985. The prime motivations for the change in policies between the two countries was Hussein's exasperation with the PLO and a general disappointment with relations with Egypt. Major problems that remained in 1985 were Syrian supported terrorist activity directed toward Jordan with the aim of deterring Jordanian support for the peace process. Another issue was Syrian support for Iran in the Gulf War. Hussein appointed a top minister who was known to be friendly with Assad-Zayd al Rifa'i. The big break through in relations took place at the Arab Summit in Cassablanca that year. The two countries established a reconciliation committee. This committee met several times in the capitals of both countries. Huessin admitted in a letter to Assad that Jordan had harbored terrorists from the Muslim Brotherhood that had targeted the Assad regime. The two countries agreed to exchange ambassadors and from that point further relations have continued to improve. 

MID3957 was the Persian Gulf War. In the conflict Jordan aligned with Iraq while Syria aligned with Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, the US and a host of other nations. 

Although Jordan and Syria were opposed in this mid both countries went to great lengths to assure the other that relations between the two were still on firm ground and that the two were friendly. 

SOURCES-CR:
MECS, 1985, 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993; Metz, 1989; New York Times 3/6/1959; April through August 1948; November through January 1980-1. 

PS-NARRATIVE: 

19460525-19520316 0.25

Jordan became independent on May 25, 1946. Syria became independent on April 17, 1946. Syria and Jordan were allies in the 1948 war against Israel. The relations between the two countries after independence were positive. King Abdullah of Jordan suggested the formation of a federation into Greater Syria, including Syria, Jordan and Lebanon. The plan was not supported by Syrian parliament members. By 1951 this plan received support from Syria, but they wanted a federation under the leadership of Damascus rather than Amman. 

19520317-19570412 0.5

On March 17, 1952 the new military regime in charge in Damascus established diplomatic relations with Jordan. The Syrian Chief of Staff, Col. Fewzi Selo made an official visit to King Talal of Jordan on that day, in Amman. This signaled a new era of relations. With Syria's alliance with the Soviet Union starting in 1956, the relations between the two countries took a turn for the worse. Some 5,000 Syrian troops entered northern Jordan on April 13, 1957.

19851021-19860618 Transition

Syria and Jordan reaffirmed their rejection of "partial or unilateral" peace settlements with Israel at a second round of reconciliation talks, Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia said on October 21, 1985. Syria broke diplomatic relations with Jordan in 1980, accusing King Hussein of harboring members of the Moslem Brotherhood, a fundamentalist group opposed to President Hafez Assad. Abdullah said the talks were expected to continue in Amman and Damascus, capitals of Jordan and Syria respectively. Abdullah issued his statement at the end of the two-day meeting, after Premiers Abdul Rauf al-Kasm of Syria and Zaid al-Rifai of Jordan left Saudi Arabia. He also hinted at progress in Saudi efforts to ease the strain in relations between Syria and Iraq. The prince said high-level security advisers of the two countries met on the Syrian-Iraqi border Monday, which might be a "harbinger of clearing atmosphere among the brothers." He gave no further details. Abdullah heads a pan-Arab committee entrusted by the special Arab summit in Casablanca in August with improving Syria's relations with Iraq and Jordan. Syria and Jordan pledged adherence to the "Fez plan" that provides for a "comprehensive and just peace in the framework of an international conference under the auspices of the United Nations," Abdullah said. The plan, named for the last regular Arab summit in Fez, Morocco, in 1982, was proposed by King Fahd of Saudi Arabia. Abdullah's comments suggested Syria was satisfied that Jordan would not make an independent settlement with Israel similar to the one Egypt reached in 1978 with U.S. mediation. Assad condemned the Egypt-Israel treaty and had expressed suspicion that King Hussein was seeking a similar one covering the Israeli-occupied West Bank of the Jordan River. Jordan's state radio said the latest talks were held "in a cordial and positive atmosphere." It quoted Rifai as saying Jordan "gives priority to its strategy for honest work in support of Arab solidarity." The two prime ministers held their first talks in mid-August.

On November 12, 1985, the Jordanian premier Zaid al Rifai has predicted that the disunion between Jordan and Syria will soon come to an end. The prediction was contained in his letter of reply to the Jordanian King Hussein in which he praised the "bold step" taken by the king in openly admitting that he was deceived by some "subversive elements" in handling the Jordan-Syria relations. The Jordanian premier is going to visit to Damascus on November 12, 1985, the first visit of a Jordanian premier to Syria in nine years since 1976. King Hussein, now on a tour of West Europe, in an earlier letter to his premier recalled that Jordan was astonished when bloody events taking place in Syria in late 1970's and dismayed to hear Syria's repeating the accusation that the events were partly caused by elements in Jordan. `But all of a sudden we discovered the truth about the whole affairs and we realized what was happening. It emerged that some groups which have had to do with bloody events in Syria were actually living in Jordan, hiding behind religious groups," the king said. The king in his letter vowed to crack down on the subversive elements and said Jordan will not allow any groups or elements of destruction to lurk in the country and sow dissension between Jordan and any other Arab countries. One of the reasons behind the disunion between the two countries is the murder and armed rebellion made by the organization of Muslim Brotherhood in Syria in 1981. Syria accused that Jordanian authorities supported this religious organization of Syria but Jordan denied. Observers here believe that the king's letter on Jordan-Syria relations would exert far-reaching positive influence on the rapprochement between the two countries.

President Hafez Assad of Syria made the 110-mile journey to Amman on May 5, 1986 for the first time in almost a decade, capping an eight-month effort to improve ties between the estranged Arab neighbors. Bagpipers played martial music as Assad disembarked from his Boeing 727 jetliner, and Jordan's King Hussein greeted him with the traditional Arab kiss on each cheek. The two leaders then sped away in a motorcade to Hussein's hilltop palace, where they held talks and shared lunch. Jordan's prime minister, Zaid Rifai, and his Syrian counterpart, Abdel-Raouf Kasem, met in the afternoon, prior to a palace banquet. Jordanian Information Minister Mohammed Khatib told reporters who watched the arrival at Amman's military airport that the event was "an extraordinary visit" and that the two leaders would discuss "all issues which interest the Arab case." In a move apparently related to Assad's visit, Syria on Sunday released 12 Jordanians held under administrative detention and Jordan freed three Syrians, the Amman daily Sawt al-Shaab reported. Assad's trip completes a round of visits that started in September, when Saudi Arabia hosted Kasem and Rifai, seeking to end six years of hostility between Jordan and Syria. Kasem and Rifai later visited one another's countries and Hussein flew to Damascus, the Syrian capital, in December. Saudi Arabia, which encouraged Jordan and Syria to reconcile, is a major financial backer of both. Each country recently has been having financial difficulties. Jordanian officials have privately expressed disappointment at the pace of the reconciliation with Syria, although they said they were satisfied by the end to hostilities. A series of terrorist attacks on Jordanian diplomats and interests overseas ended shortly after the reconciliation effort started. Jordanian officials had blamed Syrian-backed Palestinian groups for those attacks. In November, Hussein acknowledged Jordan had backed Syrian dissidents, and he promised to prevent that in the future. The two countries remain at loggerheads over one of the crucial issues that led to their falling out in 1980. Jordan still supports Iraq and Syria backs Iran in their 5 1/2-year-old war. They also maintain differing approaches to peace with Israel. Hussein has reiterated his support for a plan to offer peace to Israel in exchange for its withdrawal from all lands captured in the 1967 war and creation of a Palestinian state confederated with Jordan. Syria has been cool to that idea. However, Jordan and Syria agreed last November to reject any bilateral peace treaties with Israel of the sort Egypt signed in 1979. The king in February also cleared away one hurdle to improve ties with Damascus by breaking with Palestine Liberation Organization Chairman Yasser Arafat, who is at odds with Syria.

Diplomatic relations between Jordan and Syria will be resumed to the ambassadorial level soon, a Jordanian Foreign Ministry source told on May 14, 1986. This is a sign of the improvement of bilateral relations between the two countries since Syrian president Hafez Assad's visit to Jordan early in May 1986. The source said the Jordanian government has appointed a new ambassador to Syria, who is waiting for order to go to Damascus. According to the Jordanian newspaper "Ad Dustour", the Syrian side will appoint its ambassador to Jordan in the near future. The diplomatic relations between Jordan and Syria has been maintained on the level of charge d'affaires since 1981. Relations were ruptured over support given by Jordan to the Muslim brotherhood, which opposes Assad in Syria, and Syrian support for factions of the Palestine liberation organization(PLO) opposed to PLO chairman Yasser Arafat.

19860619-20050226 0.25

Jordan's first ambassador to Syria will leave for Damascus on June 19, 1986, according to the Jordanian news agency. On the eve of his departure, he said to the agency that he will do his best to develop brotherly relations between the two countries. Je said that the development of bilateral relations is beneficial not only to Jordan and Syria but also to the Arab nation as a whole. Jordan and Syria have improved their relations since earlier in 1986. The dispatch of a Jordanian ambassador to Syria is another important move taken to further coordinate the relations between Jordan and Syria, observers in Amman pointed out.

On March 15, 1987, Jordan and Syria were discussing in Amman how to promote their economic ties through the Jordanian-Syrian joint industry company (JSIC), according to Jordan news agency, PETRA. The Jordanian minister of trade and industry Rajai Muasher and his Syrian counterpart Ali al Tarabulsi, who arrived to Amman for a two-day visit to Jordan, co-chaired the meeting of the JSIC general assembly. The meeting reviewed the activities of the 20.5 million Jordan dinar (60 million US dollars) project of a white cement company in southern Jordan and another project in Syria for manufacturing carpets. According to the JSIC annual report, the white cement company, whose commercial operations started in August 1985 with a daily output of 320 tons, is producing cement with "excellent quality, registering two percent higher than the British standard for cement quality." Its total output during the company's experimental and commercial operations reached 47,058 tons, out of which 36,344 tons were marketed in Jordan and Syria. The meeting also reviewed the steps taken for establishing a company to produce pesticides in Damascus, PETRA reported.

President Hafez al-Assad has decided to attend the Arab summit in Jordan next month after receiving assurances that it will not be limited to the Iran-Iraq war, a spokesman said on October 13, 1987. Syria supports Iran in the seven-year-old war. Mr. Assad and President Saddam Hussein of Iraq have long been enemies. Arab League foreign ministers announced at a meeting in Tunis last month that the leaders would convene Nov. 8 in Amman, Jordan, to consider steps against Iran if it failed to heed United Nations peace efforts. Syrian officials said then that Mr. Assad would probably not attend unless the agenda was broadened to include subjects other than the war. His spokesman, Jibrane Kourieh, said today that President Assad has accepted the invitation and will ''attend the Amman summit personally.'' Mr. Kourieh spoke after Mr. Assad held a four-hour meeting with Prime Minister Zaid al-Rifai of Jordan, which led the effort to get Mr. Assad to the summit. Mr. Rifai handed Mr. Assad a letter from King Hussein of Jordan that said the Arab leaders would ''discuss all issues of interest to the Arab nation.'' Syria has stayed away from two previous Arab summits, in 1980 and 1985, because of its support for Iran. Most of the Arab states back Iraq. Jordan has been trying to reconcile Syria and Iraq for the November meeting.

Syria has promised, during the recent visit of prime minister Modar Badran to Damascus on December 17, 1990, not to allow an Israeli aggression on Jordan, Jordanian newspaper 'Sawt al-Shaab' quoted Jordanian informed sources as saying. Syrian president Hafez al-Assad had told Badran that his country would allow no threat to Jordan, the sources said. 'It is the duty of the Syrian armed forces to defend Syria, Jordan and every Arab country that would be attacked,' al-Assad said. However, he pointed out that Syria would not allow Iraq's military power to be destroyed. The Syrian president called for enhancing cooperation between Damascus and Amman in all fields, particularly in the military aspect, with the aim of repelling any likely aggression. Prime Minister Badran paid a working visit to Syria on December 17, 1990. President al-Assad's meeting with Badran lasted six hours during which all aspects of the present Arab situation, particularly developments of the gulf crisis, were considered, the sources explained. The Jordanian premier explained to the Syrian president the threats posed to Jordan, as well as the damage Jordan would suffer because of the eruption of any war in the region or the occurrence of any Israeli aggression. Observers here pointed to the different stances adopted by the two countries toward the gulf crisis. Jordan has been adopting a pro-Iraqi attitude since the gulf crisis began on August 2, 1990, while Syria has sent some of its military units to Saudi Arabia to join the US-led multinational force confronting Iraq in the gulf region.

Jordan's Foreign Minister Kamel Abu Jaber arrived in Damascus on February 15, 1992, signaling a thaw in relations between the two countries, which cooled during the recent Moscow Mideast talks. Syria and Lebanon boycotted the Moscow peace parley because of the lack of progress in the bilateral talks held in Madrid and Washington over key issues related to the Arab-Israeli conflict. But relations between Jordan and Syria were marred because the Jordanians agreed to participate at the Moscow talks without consulting Damascus. ''Abu Jaber's visit (to Damascus) is an indication that the relations between the two countries are now on the right track,'' a Syrian Foreign Ministry official told United Press International. Abu Jaber, who began talks with his Syrian counterpart Farouk Sharaa, told reporters he was carrying a message to the Syrian President Hafez Assad from Jordan's King Hussein dealing with ''coordination of the policy of the two sisterly countries in the upcoming Mideast peace talks.'' The hardline Syrian government has said that achieving progress toward key issues was a precondition for taking part in the multilateral talks. The Mideast peace talks were expected to resume in Washington later this month, but no date has been set yet for the talks.

On September 23, 1992, Jordan and Syria have agreed to link their telecommunications networks in an agreement seen as a cornerstone for eventually integrating the neighboring nations' communications systems. Under the agreement, signed by the countries' Post and Communications ministers Tuesday, cables will be laid from the Syrian capital Damascus to the Jordanian capital. Each country will pay for the cost of cables on their own territories. Syrian minister Mohammed Martini said the accord would ''serve as a cornerstone for further moves aimed at completing the integration of Jordanian and Syrian communication fields and then with other Arab countries.'' The ministers also discussed increasing the number of telephone channels between Amman and Damascus. Despite political differences-Jordan is a strong ally of Iraq, Syria's enemy-the two countries have maintained strong communication and trade links. Jordan and Syria have for some years exchanged national news and radio programs, and under a 1976 agreement Jordan supplies southern Syrian regions with electric power. Tuesday's agreement is part of Syria's $485 million overhaul of its public telecommunications systems, expected to be completed by 1997. The bulk of the funding for the program is in direct loans from the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development. According to a March 1992 Mideast Markets report, Syria has received a minimum of $3 billion from Kuwait for its support of the U.S.-led invasion to oust Iraq from the oil-rich emirates.

Tension has heightened between Jordan and Syria, whose relations have been at a low ebb since Jordan signed a peace treaty with Israel 13 months ago, diplomats said on November 22, 1995. Jordanian Foreign Minister Abdulkarim Kabariti accused Syria of "hypocrisy", following claims by Syrian Vice President Abdul Halim Kahddam that Jordan was seeking to dismember Iraq. Talking to reporters, Kabariti said Syria had ceased being an enemy of Iraq since the defection of Iraqi military weapons expert Hussein Kamil Hassan to Jordan in August. Syria, which had been a member of the the U.S.-led coalition against Baghdad in the Gulf war, started accusing Jordan of wanting the disintegration of Iraq after the defection, the minister said. "The accusations and counteraccusations between the two countries are definitely signs of a widening rift and increased tension," said one diplomat, who requested anonymity. Kabariti also pointed out that Syria, which criticized Jordan's peace treaty with Israel, has suddenly become eager to achieve a breakthrough in its peace talks with the Jewish state. Syria's position has changed overnight from "very negative" to "very flexible," he said. The foreign minister said the double standards in Syria's position is evident by Damascus' intended participation in the Barcelona summit of Mediterranean states next week, which Israel will also attend. Syria boycotted last month's Middle East and North Africa summit in Jordan, arguing that it could not take part in a meeting on regional cooperation with Israel without a peace deal of its own.

On March 19, 1996, Jordan said it rejects Syrian "interference" in its internal affairs-but said Amman was willing to improve relations with Damascus if Syria was inclined to do likewise.b"We do not interfere in Syria's affairs, and we do not want Syria to interfere in our affairs," Prime Minister Abdul Karim Kabariti said, adding: "We will want to improve relations with Syria if it shows that it wants to do the same." The Premier's comment came in response to Syria's repeated criticism for Amman's call for a change in the Iraqi regime as well as its October 1994 peace treaty with Israel. "There are no differences in positions (between Jordan and Syria) but there are different point of views concerning regional roles," Kabariti was quoted as telling a meeting with parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee. Damascus accused Jordan of attempting to divide Iraq and threaten its territorial integrity through its call for change in the regime, which Amman holds responsible for the continuation of suffering of the Iraqi people. But Jordan lashed out at Damascus, accusing it of hypocrisy after Syria adopted Amman's position and started working on hosting a conference for Iraqi opposition leaders to work on toppling Iraqi President Saddam Hussein's regime. The premier told deputies that his meeting with Syrian Foreign Minister Farouk Sharaa on the sidelines of an Arab League meeting last week was "very fiery" and that it "represented an attempt to improve relations with Syria". In their meeting, the two officials reportedly argued over Syria's boycott of the anti-terrorism summit held in Egypt's Sharm el-Sheikh to discuss measures to counter terrorism in the region, especially in Israel and the Palestinian West bank, in order to "rescue to Middle East peace process." Kabariti told Sharaa that Syria's absence gave the impression that Damascus supported terrorism. The Syrian official, however, defended that position, saying Syria would not attend a summit aimed at defending Israeli occupation in the West Bank or the Syrian Golan Heights.

On June 9, 1996, the Jordanian weekly Shihan' has analyzed the reasons for the recent deterioration in Jordanian-Syrian relations. In an "exclusive report", Shihan' said relations between the two countries had reached an "extremely critical stage", especially after Syrian Defense Minister Mustafa Talas described Jordan as a "shield" for Israel. Jordanian Prime Minister Kabariti, according to the weekly, said Syrian policy was "marked by hypocrisy and the use of double standards against Jordan". The weekly warned that if Egyptian President Mubarak's attempt to diffuse the crisis failed, there would be a "showdown" between Jordan's King Husayn and Syrian President Assad.

Jordan and Syria agreed to set up an early warning system to monitor the quality of Yarmouk River water flowing into Jordan, a Jordanian official said on November 23, 1998. Dureid Mahasneh, secretary-general of the Jordan Valley Authority, told a news conference that Syria agreed to set up several stations to monitor the river's water from its springs in Syria and would report weekly on the water quality. Jordan has complained that Yarmouk water had become tainted by waste leaking into tributaries in Syria. The two-day meeting ended Sunday when it was announced the two sides agreed to revive plans to build a $ 214 million dam on the Yarmouk near their border by 2003. Jordan also plans a $ 70 million wastewater treatment plant near the border, Mahasneh said. Syria also agreed to Jordan's demands for its full share of water from the river, about 220 million cubic meters yearly, that stem from past agreements, he said. Jordan has been getting 135 million cubic meters annually from the Yarmouk.

Jordan's King Abdullah, accompanied by an entourage of officials, arrived in Damascus on April 21, 1999 on his first visit to Syria since ascending the throne in February 1999. The 37-year-old monarch was greeted at the airport by Syrian President Hafez Assad and senior officials. Talks between Assad and Abdullah are expected to cover bilateral relations, the stalled peace negotiations between Syria and Israel in addition to the issues of Jordanian prisoners in Syria and a dam at al-Wahda. Jordan wants to revive a project agreed upon in the 1970s to build the joint dam, and it also would like an increase in trade. Jordan says Syria has been detaining without charge about 500 Jordanians, some of them since the 1980s. The English-language Syria Times newspaper quoted Jordan's ambassador in Syria, Nasouh al-Majali, as saying Abdullah's visit to Syria aimed at strengthening brotherly relations between the two countries. Assad visited Jordan on February 8 to pay his condolences to Abdullah on his father's death. His son Bashar, expected to succeed Assad one day as president, also met the king on February 25, also to pay condolences. Diplomatic ties between the two capitals deteriorated in 1994 when Jordan signed the Wadi Araba peace accord with Israel. Syria's representation in Amman has been on the level of charge d'affaires since 1993. Relations between the two neighboring states, usually overshadowed by differences over peace with the Jewish state, have improved since that visit. A big delegation accompanied the king on his visit to the Syrian capital. It included Prime Minister Abdura'uf Rawabdeh, Foreign Minister Abdul-Ilah Khateeb and several ministers. King Abdullah has said relations between Jordan and Syria are "improving". "We are in persistent contacts with them (Syrians) to exchange views and consult about issues of mutual interests," he said. Abdullah has visited Saudi Arabia, Oman, the United Arab Emirates and Libya to muster support for the throne he inherited on February 7. Diplomats say that Amman can play a role in what may be a relaunch of Syrian-Israeli peace negotiations after the Israeli elections on May 17.

Syria started pumping water on July 14, 2001, to drought-stricken Jordan from the Yarmouk River to help its southern neighbor make up for shortage of drinking water, a Syrian Irrigation Ministry official said. In a ceremony attended by Syrian deputy minister of irrigation, Barakat Hadid, and Fadhel al-Alem, secretary-general of Jordan Valley, Syria begins supplying Jordan with some 33,000 cubic meters daily for two months. Barakat said the amount which will be pumped to Jordan would never affect Syrian citizens even though Syria also suffers a severe water crisis. Under the agreement signed on May 1999, Syria will give Jordan some 8 million cubic metres (280 million cubic feet) of water during summer time to overcome Jordan's shortage of water caused by draught. It's the third year in a row that Syria steps in to help Jordan make up for shortages caused by a drought in the region. Last year, Syria pumped 60,000 cubic meters for Jordan daily for two months. The water will come from Sahm Il-Golan Dam on the Yarmouk River. The dam is three kilometres (1.8 miles) from the Jordanian border. The Yarmouk River begins in Syria, flows along the Syrian-Jordanian border, then joins the Jordan River downstream from Lake Tiberias in northeastern Israel. Syria itself suffers from a water shortage owing to drop in rainfall throughout the past two years, something that has led to water rationing in all Syrian cities that reaches up to 16 hours daily. Nonetheless, Syria is keen to maintain close ties with its southern neighbor, with whom it has nurtured good relations when Abdullah ascended to the throne in February 1999.

Jordan's King Abdullah II and Syrian President Bashar Assad launched a major water project on February 9, 2004, that had been stalled for several years partly because of political strains between the two Mideast neighbors. A ceremony marking the start of the Wihdeh, or Unity, Dam preceded Abdullah's visit to the Syrian capital Damascus for the first time in nearly two years. The meeting, originally scheduled for October, was abruptly postponed for "technical" reasons neither government ever publicly explained. At Maqaren, Abdullah and Assad laid a commemorative plaque on the Jordanian bank of the Yarmouk River, whose water is shared by Israel, Jordan and Syria. The stream originates from Syrian mountains and flows into the biblical Jordan River. Following the ceremony, Assad and Abdullah held talks at the People's Palace in Damascus, where Assad hosted a banquet for his Jordanian guest. The talks focused on the stalled Middle East process, the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories and Iraq, and bilateral relations, Syria's official news agency, SANA, reported. They also discussed a barrier is building against the Palestinian areas, calling it a "racist wall" that proves Israel's "unpeaceful intentions" and negligence of international law. "The two leaders also discussed ways to preserve Iraq's unity and territorial integrity, and the need to enable to Iraqi people to chose their representatives at the earliest possible time," SANA said. Jordan's relations with Syria have been lukewarm because of differing approaches to a regional Arab-Israeli peacemaking. Jordan, which signed a peace treaty with Israel in 1994, has taken a more moderate policy on the protracted Mideast conflict than has Syria. Visits between Abdullah and Assad-like their predecessors-have been occasional since both leaders took charge of their countries in 1999 and 2000, respectively. Abdullah last visited Damascus in March 2002, while Assad's last visit to his southern neighbor was in October 2001. The two leaders, however, have since met at Arab summits, usually held every March. The Wihdeh Dam, which will provide water for parched Jordan and generate electricity for Syria, has been considered since 1986 although negotiations began in 1953. Its implementation has been hampered by Jordanian-Syrian political strains, lack of funds and Israeli objections. Israel, however, approved construction of the dam after the conclusion of the peace treaty with Jordan. Israel's access to Yarmouk water will not be affected. Jordan forecasts the dam-which will cost 66 million Jordanian dinars (US$93 million)-will store 110 million cubic meters (3.8 billion cubic feet) of water for drinking and irrigation. Maqaren is 110 kilometers (68 miles) northwest of the Jordanian capital Amman. Launching the dam signals an end to a rift that surfaced two months ago, when Jordan and Syria became engaged in a minor war of words following a suggestion by Abdullah-made on the king's visit to the United States in early December-that Syria's border with Iraq needed to be better secured against passage of terrorists fighting the U.S.-led coalition forces. The comments angered Damascus, whose ties with the United States have been tense over the border issue and other U.S. accusations of noncooperation. Jordanian government officials have said the matter was exaggerated by the press. Syrian and Jordanian officials have since exchanged visits and telephone contacts.

Jordan said on November 24, 2004, that Jordan and Syria have agreed in principle to redraw their borders for the first time since 1970, when Syrian troops advanced southward during a conflict between Jordan and Palestinian guerrillas opposed to this kingdom's Hashemite monarchy. Under a draft agreement, Jordan is also expected to return to Syria land seized following the 1970 civil war, known as "Black September." The draft was concluded this week between technical teams from both countries in the Syrian capital, Damascus, said Jordanian government spokeswoman Asma Khader. Syria's and Jordan's Cabinets must endorse the accord before it takes effect. Khader told The Associated Press the deal sets the stage for both neighbors to return to their original 1931 borders. Interior Minister Samir Habashneh said the agreement would be signed in the coming months, but did not specify when, and said it would affect an area of 125 square kilometers (48 square miles) of Jordanian land held by Syria and 2.5 square kilometers (one square mile) of Syrian territory under Jordanian control. Syrian officials were unavailable for comment, but Syria's official news agency reported late Monday that the joint Syrian-Jordanian committee had reached a draft agreement that would be signed soon. During the civil war 34 years ago, Syrian forces advanced into Jordan despite assurances from then Syrian President Noureddine Atassi-a strong supporter of Palestinian guerrillas led by the late Yasser Arafat's Palestine Liberation Organization-to remain neutral. Syrian troops advanced to Thaghret Asfour, a small town just outside Jerash, 27 kilometers (17 miles) north of the Jordanian capital Amman. Syria later withdrew from much of the Jordanian territory, but kept some. In 1980, Jordan and Syria again massed troops on their borders as tensions flared over Syrian allegations that Jordan supported the banned Muslim Brotherhood against the ruling Arab Baath Socialist Party in Damascus. No shots were fired, but Jordanian and Syrian armies snatched territory from each other. Damascus has often been critical of Amman's calls for a peaceful settlement to the lingering Arab-Israeli conflict. Tensions climaxed when Jordan signed a 1994 peace treaty with Israel. However, ties slightly warmed when the new leaders of both countries inherited power from their fathers in 1999 and 2000. Khader also said the agreement envisaged closer border security cooperation and "good neighborly relations," but declined to elaborate. During a Damascus visit in August, Habashneh said both countries would conclude a security agreement to "organize cooperation in border control, fighting crimes and drugs." He did not elaborate, but government officials later explained this was partly aimed at curbing smuggling and infiltration. Jordanian security officials say the Syrian borders have been a source of arms and drug smuggling to the Arab kingdom, despite Jordanian efforts to tighten border controls. Jordan has said that some of the 17 al-Qaida-linked militants who allegedly plotted foiled terrorist attacks last April in Jordan, including the U.S. Embassy, came from Syria. Damascus has denied the charges, as it has denied similar accusations by Washington that Damascus has been failing to stop foreign militants infiltrating into Iraq from Syria, which says it is unable to efficiently control the long and porous borders with its southern and eastern neighbors.

20050227-20159999 0.5

Jordan and Syria will sign an agreement on February 27, 2005 to settle a long-standing border dispute, Jordanian Interior Minister Samir Habashneh said. The agreement will be signed at a meeting in Amman of the Jordanian-Syrian Higher Committee, Habashneh told the pro-government Al-Rai and Al-Dustour dailies. The two neighbors said in late 2004 that they had agreed to settle the dispute. Jordan has maintained that the Syrian border encroaches 125 square km inside Jordanian territory, while Jordan runs 2.5 square km into Syria. Prime Minister Faisal al-Fayez and his Syrian counterpart Naji Otri are expected to chair the committee meeting.

Syria and Jordan signed a batch of cooperation agreements on June 29, 2006, two months after their relations were strained by the discovery of a Hamas arms cache in the kingdom. The agreements were signed after two days of meetings of a bilateral committee, presided over by Jordanian Prime Minister Marouf al-Bakhit and his Syrian counterpart Mohammed Naji Otari. Al-Bakhit met Syrian President Bashar Assad and gave him a letter from Jordan's King Abdullah II, indicating an easing of tensions since April when Jordanian police arrested 20 activists of the militant Palestinian Hamas group for smuggling weapons into the kingdom from Syria. Jordan accused the activists of plotting to attack various targets in the country, and of having undergone training in Syria for the operation. Syria, which hosts the Hamas leadership and Hamas denied the allegations. In a statement, the High Joint Syrian-Jordanian Committee said the two sides signed a memorandum of understanding on investment, an economic cooperation agreement, an accord on Jordan purchasing Syrian wheat, and other agreements on vocational training, environment, youth, and scientific and technical research.

On July 3, 2006, Jordan has asked Syria for 15 million cubic meters (19.62 million cubic yards) of water from the Yarmouk River to help the kingdom overcome the summer shortfall, the water and irrigation minister said. Mohammed Thafer al-Alem told reporters that a technical committee will meet in the coming days to find a mechanism to pump water into to Jordan. In remarks carried by the official Petra news agency, Al-Alem said that according to an agreement with Syria, the Yarmouk's waters must flow during the summer season. The Yarmouk, which has its headwaters in Syria, is Jordan's most important source of water. The Jordan River and wells are its other sources. Al-Alem contended that dams and wells in Syria were impinging on Jordan's share of the river's waters. He predicted that unless Syria's water use patterns change the river could dry up. The minister did not say whether Syria had agreed to meet the request. Under an agreement with Syria, Jordan has the right to 211 million cubic meters (275.98 cubic yards) of water at the Wihda Dam, currently under construction along their shared border, and 206 million cubic meters (269.44 cubic yards) from the waters flowing in the riverbed before the dam. Jordan's relations with Syria were strained this spring when it discovered a cache of weapons belonging to the Palestinian militant group Hamas whose political leadership is based in Damascus.

PS-SOURCES: New York Times May 1, 1949; August 5, 1951; March 18, 1952; United Press International November 5, 1983; February 15, 1992; September 23, 1992; Associated Press October 21, 1985; May 5, 1986; November 23, 1998; July 3, 2006; February 9, 2004; November 24, 2004; June 29, 2006; Xinhua July 22, 1984; November 12, 1985; May 14, 1986; March 15, 1987; December 24, 1990; BBC March 6, 1982; March 13, 1984; June 9, 1996; New York Times October 13, 1987; Deutsche Presse Agentur November 22, 1995; March 19, 1996; April 21, 1999; July 14, 2001; AFX. COM February 22, 2005




MARITIME-MIDS:

MARITIME-DISPUTE:

Discussion:
