FILE: cm652660v11.0.txt
DYAD: SYRIA-LEBANON
RIVALRY: RIV1249
DISPUTE(S): MID1603 
RIVALRY: RIV1250
DISPUTE(S): MID3167 MID3166 MID3173 

RIVNOTES: 

PS: 19460417-19480324 0.5 19480325-19630204 0.25 19630205-19691113 0.00 19691114-20081013 0.25 20081014-20209999 0.50

PS-UPDATE2020:

PSNOTES: There is no information for the period 19460417-19480324. Given that the two countries were part of the same French mandate and the lack of information, 0.5 was considered the appropriate coding level. Second, their relationship is particularly important in relation to Israel and this does not start until 1948.

RIV5.10 changes: cm652660v5.10.txt-MID3444 is removed from RIV1250

RIV1250: MID3.02 adds Syria as participant to MID3444 (1982). MID3.1 now has Syria and Lebanon as allies so mid3444 is removed from this rivalry. From mid31changes.txt file: "MID3444 End year implies that Syria's participation as the only initiator ends while conflict involving the two targets continues Syria's dispute exit date is correct. There are, however, problems with the sideA and revstate and revtype1 coding. According to news reports, Israel should be coded to sideA while Syria and Lebanon should be coded to sideB. Israel should be coded "1" for revstate while Syria and Lebanon should be coded "0". Israel should be coded as revtype1 "2" while Syria and Lebanon should be coded as revtype1 "0". sideA, revstate and revtype1 coding changes were made in MID B file NYT Dispute Changed 3.1 Jul-06"

RIV1250: MID3.02 adds Syria as participant to MID3444 (1982).

PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20220321
PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20220321

Territorial-Maritime-Boundary Issues Variables

MID1603

TERRMID: MID1603 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID1603 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID1603 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID1603 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID1603 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID1603 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID1603 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID1603 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID1603 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID1603 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID1603 from Gibler 2018, in 1949 Syrian soldiers crossed into Lebanon and killed a Lebanese man for allegedly spying for Israel and selling land to Jews. Lebanon arrested the soldiers. From cm narrative, Syria and Lebanon had a rivalry centered on Syria's pressure on Lebanon to oppose Israel, and these tensions contributed to this MID. Egypt and Saudi Arabia mediated an end to this dispute. Coded not civil war because this was not connected to militarized rebel activity, but rather to the targeting of a single civilian and the arrest of soldiers. 

CIVWARLINK: MID1603 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID1603 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID1603 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID1603 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID1603 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID1603 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID3167

TERRMID: MID3167 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID3167 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID3167 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID3167 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID3167 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID3167 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID3167 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID3167 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID3167 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID3167 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID3167 from Gibler 2018, in 1963 Syrian troops entered Lebanon and interrogated villagers suspected of being Nasserite agents. From cm narrative, Lebanon contained a militarized pro-Nasser rebel group that had fought in the 1958 Lebanese Civil War. Syria was wary of the Nasserite group in Syria. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to militarized rebels in Lebanon, within this dyad. 

CIVWARLINK: MID3167 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID3167 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID3167 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID3167 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID3167 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID3167 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID3166

TERRMID: MID3166 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID3166 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID3166 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID3166 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID3166 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID3166 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID3166 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID3166 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID3166 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID3166 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID3166 from Gibler 2018, in 1963 a Nasserite rebel group tried and failed to depose the government. Syria then made several incursions into Lebanon to target the rebels, and several Lebanese soldiers were killed in an ambush. Lebanon protested several other incursions by Syria. Coded civil MID because this was connected to militarized rebels in Lebanon attempting to overthrow the Syrian government (both states in this dyad). Note that COW and Gibler 2018 describe this as a coup attempt, but since the attempt to overthrow the government was not by any political or military elites, we do not consider it a coup MID. 

CIVWARLINK: MID3166 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID3166 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID3166 1 -- coup MID
COUPMID-CER: MID3166 2 -- somewhat uncertain 
COUPMID-NOTES: MID3166 Conflict with the Nasserites broke out in the aftermath of the 1963 coup, and Nasserites constituted part of the governing council of Syria at the time. The attempt to overthrow the government may not have been made by any political or military elites. Coded coup MID because it results from earlier coup events, and Gibler 2018 describe this as a coup attempt. Coded uncertain because elites may not have been involved in the attempt itself.

COUPLINK: MID3166 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID3166 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID3173

TERRMID: MID3173 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID3173 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID3173 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID3173 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID3173 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID3173 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID3173 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID3173 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID3173 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID3173 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID3173 from Gibler 2018, in 1969 Lebanon was fighting against Syria-backed Palestinian rebels. Syria closed its border with Lebanon when Lebanon clashed with the rebels until a ceasefire was reached. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to militarized rebels in Lebanon, who were supported by Syria. 

CIVWARLINK: MID3173 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID3173 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID3173 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID3173 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID3173 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID3173 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

NARRATIVE-CM:
Syrian troops killed several Lebanese near the border in May 1949. Lebanese troops arrested four Syrian soldiers for their involvement in the killings, and Syria demanded that the soldiers be turned over to Syrian officials. Egypt attempted to mediate negotiations between the parties. Egypt and Saudi Arabia arbitrated a resolution of the dispute in May 1949. Syrian troops intervened in Lebanon beginning on June 1, 1976. President Leonid Brezhnev of the Soviet Union appealed for the withdrawal of Syrian troops from Lebanon on September 11, 1976, but Syria rejected the troop withdrawal appeal. Syrian troops occupied West Beirut on February 22-24, 1987, resulting in the deaths of 26 Lebanese. Lebanon and Syria signed an agreement on May 22, 1991.

SOURCES-CM: 
Brecher and Wilkenfeld, 1997, 646-647, 654-656; Butterworth, 1976, 131-132.

NARRATIVE-CR:
Historically under a variety of rulers, Syria and Lebanon were considered one territory-Greater Syria. It was only in 1920, while under the French mandate, that Greater Lebanon, which approximates the modern state, was separated from the larger entity. As a consequence, Lebanon and Syria traditionally have had strong bonds. Following World War II, after both had become independent, they shared a common currency and customs union and discussed economic union. In fact, the two had always been active trading partners, and when political disputes arose, each country often used economic means to pressure the other. 

On a political level, the more powerful Syrian state has sometimes been viewed with suspicion in Lebanon. At one time or another, Syria has developed or dissolved friendships with a number of factions, Christian as well as Muslim. 

In the 1950s and 1960s, Syria was wrestling with its own internal problems and was unable to focus on Lebanon's domestic ills. In the late 1960s the rise of Palestinian guerrilla activity in southern Lebanon contributed to tense relations with Syria. Although the Syrian government was reluctant to permit guerrilla attacks to originate from Syrian soil (for fear of Israeli reprisals), it was much less reticent to see such activity occur in southern Lebanon. 

The rivalry between Syria and Lebanon can be said to revolve around two issues. The first issue, and the dominant one was the Syrian pressure on Lebanon to oppose Israel. Two of the four disputes were designed in opposition to Israel or Jews. The other issue was the Lebanese support for pro Nasser groups within Lebanon. Syria briefly united with Egypt to form the United Arab Republic. After a coup, the Baathist regime in Syria sought out supporters of the former regime in Lebanon. 

MID1603 occurred from May through August of 1949. Here, a Syrian Army Officer entered Lebanon with three soldiers and killed a Palestinian Arab accused of selling land to Jews in Lebanon. The Lebanese authorities detained the officer. The murder and subsequent detention sparked a considerable row between the two countries. The results were the closing of the border, cessation of food shipments from Syria to Lebanon, and the closing of trade links between the two. The dispute ended in a stalemate with Egypt and Saudi Arabia negotiating a settlement to the dispute. 

MID3167 took place on February 5, 1963. A Syrian army patrol entered Lebanese frontier village in search of pro-Nasser agents suspected of taking refuge in the town. At this point in Syria's history there were a series of coups taking place originating within the army. The United Arab Republic (the union of Egypt and Syria) had been dissolved two years prior in 1961. These agents were suspected to continue support for Syrian union with Egypt in the UAR. 

The tension during this period revolved around Syrian suspicions and allegations that pro Nasser rebels were training in and launching operations from Lebanon. Syrian troops made several incursions into Lebanon in an effort to prevent hostile action from these insurgents. In September of 1963, a Syrian patrol inside Lebanon ambushed a Lebanese unit killing four Lebanese soldiers. This constitutes MID3166

Palestinians conducted operations against Israel from within Southern Lebanon. Israel conducted reprisal raids against Lebanon arguing that if Lebanon did not take action to control these operations, they were tacitly condoning these activities. Lebanon responded with actions designed to suppress the Palestinians. Syrian leaders wanted the Palestinians to continue their operations. Displeased with the Lebanese move, the Syrians closed the border with Lebanon and tensions escalated for several months (May through November of 1969.) This was MID3173. 

A significant factor associated with the termination of the rivalry is significant Syrian involvement in Lebanon dating to the start of the civil war in Lebanon in 1975. This involvement has been inconsistent. On the one hand, the regime of President Hafiz al Assad opposed the permanent fragmentation of Lebanon, fearing that the creation of a Maronite mini-state would amount to the establishment of "another Israel." On the other hand, Syria has resisted the notion of the formation of a radical, left-wing state on its western border. Furthermore, after having to deal with its own Muslim fundamentalist rebellion in the late 1970s and early 1980s, Syria was concerned that a radical Islamic state in Lebanon would have negative domestic implications. 

In the early stages of the Civil War, Syria acted as mediator, arranging several cease-fires. In February 1976 Syria helped formulate a political reform package, known as the Constitutional Document, that granted more power to Muslims; this compromise, however, was never implemented. When diplomacy failed, Syria intervened militarily. In March 1976, as the battle was going badly for the largely Christian Lebanese Front, Syria moved to prevent its total collapse, using Palestinian units under its control. In May Syria was instrumental in having Ilyas Sarkis, a pro-Syrian technocrat, elected president. By January 1977 about 27,000 Syrian troops were in Lebanon, technically as the largest part of the Arab Deterrent Force, set up by the League of Arab States (Arab League) in October 1976. 

As the conflict wore on, the situation changed dramatically for Syria. In 1978 Bashir Jumayyil began his drive to incorporate all Christian militias under his LF. He provoked Syria's animosity by decimating in June 1978 The Marada Baigade, the pro-Syrian Franjiyah militia, and by his increasingly close ties to Israel. In response, Syria began to attack vigorously its erstwhile allies, the Christian forces, in effect making a complete about-face. 

In the 1980s, Syria was the dominant external actor in Lebanon. It physically controlled much of the country, over which it imposed its will. At times, Syrian inaction, such as allowing one faction to war on another, had just as much impact as its active measures. Nonetheless, Syrian influence has had its limits. Its ability to impose stability-if, indeed, that was Assad's intention-has been frustrated by the multiplicity of factions, each with a different agenda. These limitations were visible during the 1982 invasion when Syria-alone among the Arab nations-opposed the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) on Lebanese soil. The Syrian Army was unable to halt the IDF advance or to prevent its own ejection from Beirut. Later, the insertion of the Multinational Force (MNF) also reduced Syrian influence for a time. In 1983, when Israel pressured the government of Amin Jumayyil to sign an accord, called the May 17 Agreement, that normalized relations between the two countries, Syria vehemently objected. It sponsored the formation of the National Salvation Front, a coalition of pro-Syrian groups, both Christian and Muslim, to oppose the agreement. The Syrian effort eventually succeeded, and on March 6, 1985, Jumayyil abrogated the May 17 Agreement and Israel finally withdrew some of its forces from parts of Lebanon 

There were additional examples of the strengths and limitations of Syrian influence in Lebanon. Syria brokered the Tripartite Accord, signed in late 1985 by the leaders of the main armed factions-Nabih Birri of Amal, Walid Jumblatt of the PSP, and Elie Hubayka of the LF. The accord's aim was to impose peace and to restructure the Lebanese Army. But when Jumayyil and anti-Syrian elements in the LF rebelled, the accord collapsed. 

Syria actively participated in the March-September 1989 fighting between the Christian Lebanese Forces and Muslim forces allied with Syria. In 1989, Syria endorsed the Charter of National Reconciliation, or 'Taif Accord,' a comprehensive plan for ending the Lebanese conflict negotiated under the sponsorship of Saudi Arabia, Algeria, and Morocco.

At the request of Lebanese President Hrawi, the Syrian military took joint action with the Lebanese Armed Forces on October 13, 1990, to oust rebel Gen. Michel Aoun who had defied efforts at reconciliation with the Government of Lebanon. The process of disarming and disbanding the many Lebanese militias began in early 1991. In May 1991, Lebanon and Syria signed the treaty of brotherhood, cooperation, and coordination called for in the Taif Accord. The treaty provides the most explicit recognition to date by the Syrian Government of Lebanon's independence and sovereignty. 

According to the Taif Accord, Syria and Lebanon were to have decided on the redeployment of Syrian forces from Beirut and other coastal areas of Lebanon by September 1992. Israeli occupation of Lebanon until May 2000, the breakdown of peace negotiations between Syria and Israel that same year, and intensifying Arab/Israeli tensions since the start of the second Palestinian uprising in September 2000 have helped delay full implementation of the Taif Accords. The United Nations declared that Israel's withdrawal from southern Lebanon fulfilled the requirements of UN Security Council Resolution 425. However, Syria and Lebanon claimed that UNSCR 425 had not been fully implemented because Israel did not withdraw from an area of the Golan Heights called Sheba Farms, which had been occupied by Israel in 1967, and which Syria now claimed was part of Lebanon. The United Nations does not recognize this claim. However, Lebanese resistance groups such as Hezbollah use it to justify attacks against Israeli forces in that region, creating a potentially dangerous flashpoint along the Lebanon-Israeli border. 

SOURCES-CR:
Brecher and Wilkenfeld, 1997, 646-647, 654-656; Butterworth, 1976, 131-132; Collelo, 1987; New York Times, May-August 1949; February-September, 1963; May-November, 1969

PS-NARRATIVE: 

19460417-19480324 0.5 

Lebanon became independent on November 22, 1943. Syria became independent on April 17, 1946. There were no specific events found for the period 1946-1948, thus we assumed a neutral relationship of 0.5. 

19480325-19630204 RIV1249-0.25

Lebanon became independent on November 22, 1943. Syria became independent on April 17, 1946. On March 25, 1948, Syrian Premier Jamil Mardan made Lebanese politicians angry when he suggested to form an Eastern bloc of Arab states which will allow Arab member-states to sign treaties with outside powers, only with the acceptance of all the alliance members. Lebanese politicians perceived this as a Syrian attempt to infringe upon the independence of Lebanon. On January 29, 1948, the two countries had a split in their financial policies regarding the use of the French franc in their territories. On January 5, 1949 the Presidents, Prime Minister and Ministers of Foreign Affairs of Lebanon and Syria met in the border town of Bamdhoun for talks on the Palestinian issue. MID1603 occurred from May through August of 1949. Here, a Syrian Army Officer entered Lebanon with three soldiers and killed a Palestinian Arab accused of selling land to Jews in Lebanon. The Lebanese authorities detained the officer. The murder and subsequent detention sparked a considerable row between the two countries. The results were the closing of the border, cessation of food shipments from Syria to Lebanon, and the closing of trade links between the two. The dispute ended in a stalemate with Egypt and Saudi Arabia negotiating a settlement to the dispute. On March 14, 1950, Syria and Lebanon were busy putting up customs barriers and regular passport control installations on their mutual frontier. The breakdown of their customs union came down amid recriminations in the Beirut and Damascus press between Syrian and Lebanese nationalists. In the early 1950s it was common for the two countries to close their border for a few days because of protests over newspaper allegations against one or the other of the governments. On March 6, 1954, Syria took measures to ease the border crossing with Lebanon. Citizens of either country may cross the border without obtaining entrance and exit visas and the police permits necessary until a day before. Lebanese officials also stated that there are no more Syrian political refugees in Lebanon. On February 16, 1957, the traffic between Syria and Lebanon was halted because of the refusal of the Lebanese authorities to hand back Syrian political refugees that were involved in a potential coup against the Damascus government on December 22, 1956.

On September 24, 1963, Lebanon has assured Syrian military officials that there are no anti-Damascus elements being trained at camps in Lebanon. The visit of the Syrian military officials came after a couple of Syrian military incursions across the Lebanese border, apparently in search of Syrian rebel training camps. On November 8, 1963 Syria and Lebanon ended a three weeks border dispute that followed the slaying of four Lebanese soldiers in Lebanon by Syrian forces. Lebanon said that the incident was the 17th border violation by Syrian troops in the past year. A dispute over tariffs raised on Lebanese products transiting through Syria sparked a diplomatic incident between the two countries on August 4, 1968.

19691114-20081013 0.25

On November 13, 1969, Syria reopened its border with Lebanon after keeping it shut to all traffic for 23 days. Syria threatened Lebanon with similar blockades if it does not allow the Palestinian terrorist groups to operate on its territory. On March 8, 1970 Syria warned Lebanon that it should not act against the Palestinian groups attacking Israel from its territory. On November 2, 1976 Syria reportedly sent another 3,000 troops to Lebanon as part of the Arab Deterrence Force. Syria made it clear that its forces will not leave Lebanon at the end of the ADF deployment. On February 2, 1977 Syria and Lebanon announced that they decided to formulate a common foreign and security policy for their two countries. On February 12, 1978, Syria and Lebanon agreed on measures to stop violence between Syrian peacekeepers and Lebanese soldiers and Christian militiamen. On February 24, 1980, Syria delayed indefinitely the withdrawal of its troops from Beirut and Damascus.

On March 5, 1984, there were successful talks between President Hafiz al-Asad and the Lebanese President, Amin al-Jumayyil regarding the fate of Lebanon and the presence of Syrian military personnel in Lebanon.

On April 19, 1987 Syrian soldiers dressed in red uniforms and steel helmets were present at checkpoints built of bricks and sandbags in most streets of mainly Muslim West Beirut. Seven thousand Syrian troops came here in February 1987 and began to control the reign of terror by gunmen who had fought savage battles with complete disregard for the civilian population. For the Syrians, it is a repeat performance. Their army occupied West Beirut and other parts of Lebanon in 1976 with a mandate from Arab governments to put an end to a civil war that had broken out the year before. President Hafez al-Assad rushed his army to save Beirut from destruction at the hands of rival militiamen. Why the Syrians would want to come back to the Beirut quagmire is a puzzle to many Lebanese. President Assad said his motives were humanitarian and political, to save the capital from annihilation. But Syria's foes maintain that Syria intends to annex Lebanon. Hard-line Christian leaders have opposed a pact proposed by Damascus and its Lebanese allies, the Shiite Amal movement, the Druse Progressive Socialist Party, and some of the anti-Arafat Palestinians. Syria's enemies fear the pact because its provisions could provide a pretext for annexation. But moderate Christians, such as former President Suleiman Franjieh, see Syria as the only power able to stop pro-Iranian zealots from creating an Islamic state in Lebanon. Syria supports Iran in its war with Iraq, but it fears pro-Iranian influence in Lebanon. Two days after their arrival in West Beirut, Syrian soldiers killed 23 activists of the extremist pro-Iranian Party of God. Only two weeks before, the Party of God had plastered the city walls with posters advocating a Khomeini-style state. Syria regards Lebanon as a soft belly, always worrying that its enemies will use this country as a jumping-off ground to strike at Damascus. ''Lebanon's security is part of Syria's'' is a slogan often repeated by Syrian officials. Syria believes Yasir Arafat, chairman of the P.L.0., is a threat to that security. State-controlled news outlets in Damascus have accused Mr. Arafat of inciting the fighting between Palestinians and the Amal Shiite militia at refugee districts in Beirut and southern Lebanon. Two weeks ago, Syrian soldiers moved into two districts in Beirut, ending five months of siege of the Palestinians by the Amal militia. Then a Syrian army unit was deployed at the edge of the southern port city of Sidon. The official explanation of the deployment was to end a violent confrontation east of Sidon between the P.L.O. and Amal. It is widely believed here that Syria will soon move troops into Sidon itself, which would also mean they would be in control of two large Palestinian districts in the vicinity that are strongholds for Arafat supporters. The Syrian argument is that all Arab guns must be aimed at Israel and all energies devoted to liberating occupied territory. The Israelis still occupy a six-mile deep and fifty-mile-long ''security zone'' in south Lebanon. The Syrian deployment in West Beirut has prompted some militias, especially Amal and the Party of God, to relocate hundreds of their men in southern Lebanon.

The allegations that Damascus is seeking to absorb Lebanon in a Greater Syria, repeated by Lebanon's Christian leaders and Syria's enemies in Iraq, has struck home, provoking angry denials on August 21, 1989. 'Syria has no greedy designs on Lebanon, and does not want anything for its Lebanese brothers but reconciliation, reform and unity, ' Tishreen, a Syrian government newspaper, said. `President Assad (of Syria) has expressed full support for the Casablanca summit calling for a political solution.' But the charge is one Damascus cannot ignore, for it touches on the whole history of the region, the colonial carve-up of Ottoman Syria after the First World War, and nationalist movements in Syria and Lebanon to unify the Fertile Crescent. It also raises the question of Syrian strategic interests in Lebanon, which will frustrate any attempt by the Arab League, Israel or the West to dislodge the Syrian Army from Lebanon in the present chaos. Syria, believes it has a special role in Lebanon, justified by geography, history and common culture. This cannot be expressed openly though without further antagonizing most of the Christians, who see Syrian hegemony as a threat to their French constitutional legacy, political domination.

Syria and Lebanon signed a military and political treaty on May 22, 1991, despite Israel's warning that Syria is trying to ''swallow Lebanon'' and upset the balance of power in the Middle East. The treaty was also Syria's first recognition of Lebanon, which claimed independence from France in 1943, as a sovereign state. Syrian-backed President Elias Hrawi of Lebanon and Syria's President Hafez Assad signed the treaty in Damascus at 1 p.m. before Cabinet ministers from both countries. Israel accused Syria of exploiting the Persian Gulf crisis to ''swallow Lebanon'' and Israeli spokesmen warned Syria against deploying missiles and artillery in the eastern Lebanese Bekaa Valley and southern Lebanon and against trying to disband the pro-Israeli South Lebanon army. The treaty provides for Lebanon's full coordination with Syria in the political, military, security, cultural and economic fields. Political sources said Lebanon would have to coordinate its decisions in such sensitive domains as foreign policy with its powerful Arab neighbor. Syria maintains a 35,000-strong military presence in Lebanon with the blessing of the Arab League and Western nations. The force was first deployed after the Lebanese civil war exploded in 1976. The Taif Accord, signed at Taif, Saudi Arabia, in October 1989, provided for greater bilateral cooperation to end the strife-torn nation's civil war and factional fighting. Once the Taif agreement, which called for the establishment of ''distinctive relations'' between Beirut and Damascus, was signed and endorsed by the Lebanese parliament, the Syrian-backed Lebanese army began disarming Lebanese militia groups. In addition, Syria pushed through political reforms, including the formation of a Lebanese government of national unity and ending the sectarian strife that has cost the lives of more than 100,000 Lebanese. Christian factions in Lebanon have expressed serious reservations about the Damascus Treaty, called ''The Treaty of Fraternal Coordination and Cooperation,'' fearing it may lead toSyria's domination of Lebanese political affairs. The largest Christian group in Lebanese, the Phalangists, did not send a representative to the signing of the Lebanese-Syrian treaty. The Phalangists, who are traditional foes of Syria, also fear that Damascus will impose its socialist Baath model on the economy of Lebanon, which in the past has prospered under a free-market system. Nevertheless, the treaty states that there will be no intervention by either side in the internal affairs of the other and each country will retain its economic system. But other Christian members of the 30-member Lebanese Cabinet were present at the People's Palace in Damascus where the two leaders signed the treaty. The ceremony was also attended by all members of the Syrian Cabinet. The treaty is Syria's first recognition of the sovereignty and independence of Lebanon. Until recently, Syria maintained that Lebanon was part of Greater Syria.

Claiming Syria has no ambitions in Lebanon, Prime Minister Rafik Hariri said Beirut would make peace with Israel if it were "comprehensive and overwhelming", the An Nahar newspaper reported on January 1, 1996. In an interview with An Nahar, Hariri reiterated Lebanon's call for the implementation of United Nations Security Council resolution 425, which calls for an immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Israeli troops from southern Lebanon. "We are ready to make peace," said Hariri, "if the peace is comprehensive and overwhelming." The prime minister claimed Syria has no ambitions in Lebanon, in a reference to Israeli reports indicating that Lebanon would be handed over to the Syrians as a "present" once peace is signed between Syria and Israel. "Lebanon will not be handed to anyone and I do not think Syria is waiting for Lebanon to be given to it as a present," Hariri said. "Our relations with Syria are strategic and what Lebanon wants from Syria or Syria wants from Lebanon were highlighted in the 1991 treaty of friendship, cooperation and cooperation," Hariri said. Lebanon and Syria take coordinated positions in the peace talks as part of the 1991 treaty. Syria, the main power-broker in Lebanon, maintains some 35,000 troops on two thirds of Lebanese territory. Referring to the ongoing peace talks between the Syrians and the Israelis near Washington, the Lebanese official said, "The Israelis are dealing with issues related to the peace process more seriously now." Hariri stressed that "Lebanon will not make peace with Israel without Syria and Syria will not sign peace with Israeli without Lebanon". Hariri expressed hopes that the ongoing reconstruction process in the country that started in 1992 will lead Lebanon to become an economic, cultural and touristic centre in the Middle East once peace was established.

When Israel and Syria sit down for talks in Washington on December 15, 1999, the most notable absentee will be Lebanon, the last active battleground in the Arab-Israeli conflict. A settlement in Lebanon, where Israeli forces battle regularly with Lebanese guerrillas, is seen as vital to any permanent peace. But Syria, not Lebanon, has the final say on Lebanon's policies. That factor has not only kept Lebanese officials out of the talks for now, but also could play a big role in determining how the negotiations unfold, experts say. "In a very real sense, the Syrians will have two seats at the table, whether or not the Lebanese are there," said a Damascus-based diplomat. "And while Syrians and Lebanese see eye-to-eye on most things, when they don't, you can guess who will end up the loser." Syria and Lebanon have vowed to work together, and Lebanese officials are expected to accept an American invitation to join in parallel talks with Israel as early as next week, when a second round of discussions is expected to begin. Syria's foreign minister, Farouk al-Shara, has said that his country believes that progress on the Syrian and Lebanese fronts should be "simultaneous." Each of the two countries has promised not to make peace without the other and not to compromise on their basic demands. The Syrian president, Hafez al-Assad, reportedly telephoned his Lebanese counterpart, Emile Lahoud, to coordinate their positions. Even so, Lebanon's exclusion from the first round of talks has caused some grumbling in Beirut. While Lebanese officials are careful not to criticize Syria, which maintains 30,000 troops in Lebanon, some have worried in private that Lebanon could be handed a deal that does not fully reflect their country's interests. At least in some quarters, what is of particular concern is the prospect of a peace accord that might rid Lebanon of one foreign army-the 2,000 Israelis involved in its south-while further entrenching another. Syrian forces went to Lebanon in 1976, at the invitation of the government. Syria also imposed the 1991 peace, which ended Lebanon's 16-year-long civil war. But the Syrian troops have never departed. As a price for a withdrawal from Lebanon, Israel is expected to demand security guarantees for its northern border, previously the target of attacks from Lebanon-based guerrillas. A Syrian guarantee, backed by Syrian troops, could be seen as more credible than one from Lebanon since the Lebanese have limited military capacity and have never tried to rein in the guerrillas. Israel has been critical of what some officials have portrayed as Syria's occupation of Lebanon. But in the current talks, some diplomats predict, Israel, Syria and the United States might all choose to acquiesce in a continued Syrian presence, even if it frustrates many Lebanese, particularly the Christian minority. The relationship between Syria and Lebanon is one of many strands, including gratitude, dependence and resentment. Syria has used its military presence to cement its dominant policy role. But Lebanese officials argue with validity that their country owes much to Syria, on the grounds that without Syria's military presence, Lebanon might never have recovered from a civil war that tore the country and its institutions apart. Still, the nature of the Syrian-Lebanese partnership has worked to Lebanon's disadvantage. Lebanon has borne the brunt of the pain inflicted by Israel's occupation of southern Lebanon, where its troops have been since 1978. For Syria, that Israeli presence has provided an opportunity to demonstrate to Israel, at low risk, that its continued occupation of Arab land would carry heavy costs. That message has been carried by the Lebanese guerrillas, particularly the Hezbollah, which Syria has allowed to function freely in Lebanon. But calm has prevailed along Syria's border with Israel, in the shadow of the Golan Heights, which Israel captured in 1967. A promise earlier this year by Prime Minister Ehud Barak of Israel to withdraw Israeli forces from southern Lebanon by June 2000, if a peace deal had not been reached, has served to expose the rival interests. In other circumstances, a unilateral withdraw might have been welcomed by Lebanon as a surrender. But the prospect of losing a pressure point has so alarmed Syria that it has made clear its opposition to the plan, causing Lebanon to fall in line.

About 1,000 of the 20,000 Syrian troops in Lebanon have begun dismantling bases near Beirut and in eastern and northern areas in preparation for withdrawing to the border or leaving Lebanon, a senior Lebanese military official said on July 15, 2003. Syria, the main power broker in Lebanon, has not commented on the latest troop redeployment, which was viewed in Beirut as a bid by Damascus to placate critics in the West and Lebanon. The redeployment expected to be completed Tuesday began Monday night from posts in the coastal towns of Khalde and Aramoun south of the Lebanese capital and in northern and eastern Lebanese, the official told The Associated Press on condition of anonymity. The official said Syrian troops who withdrew from south of Beirut would redeploy to eastern Lebanon's Bekaa Valley near the border with Syria, while those who vacated posts in northern Lebanon would return to Syria. The official could not say how many would leave Lebanon. The redeployment was not expected to reduce Syria's dominance in the politics of Lebanon, its western neighbor. A 1989 agreement ending Lebanon's 15-year sectarian civil war made Syria the guarantor of peace and security among the country's Christian and Muslim communities. Christian opponents of the Lebanese government demand that Syria withdraw all of its troops from Lebanon, saying the security situation has improved since Israel ended its 18-year occupation of southern Lebanon. However, the pro-Syrian government, with the support of the country's Muslim majority, says the Syrians are still needed until there is comprehensive Arab-Israeli peace. Syria once had some 35,000 troops in Lebanon, first sent in 1976 to quell the civil war but later drawn into the conflict. It began thinning its military presence in 2001, making three withdrawals from Beirut and populous central Lebanon, a stronghold of right-wing Christian opposition groups, and northern Lebanon, bringing the numbers to about 20,000 soldiers. This redeployment came amid heightened regional tensions-increased armed attacks on U.S. occupation forces in Iraq-and strenuous U.S. attempts to implement the internationally backed "road map" plan designed to end the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and set the stage for an overall Middle East peace settlement. Syrian-U.S. relations have long been strained by Washington allegations that Damascus supports terrorism. During the Iraqi war, tension heightened when the United States accused Syria of supplying military equipment to the Iraqis and giving refuge to former Iraqi officials. Syria denied the charges. "By redeploying its troops, Syria signaled its readiness to loosen its military grip on Lebanon, a move that will certainly please America, the West and its Lebanese critics," Sateh Noureddine, managing editor of the Lebanese newspaper As-Safir, told the AP. In Washington, State Department spokesman Richard Boucher said he had seen reports of possible Syrian troop withdrawals from Lebanon. He said America has "always supported the goal of a Lebanon free of foreign forces. And we've always looked to all the parties responsible to exercise their responsibilities in that regard." In Khalde and Aramoun on Tuesday, no Syrian military trucks or armored vehicles were seen near buildings that were vacated by Syrian soldiers but Syrian soldiers were seen transporting equipment.

Syria will withdraw troops from mountain and coastal areas in Lebanon in line with a 1989 agreement, Lebanon's defense minister said on February 24, 2005, amid international pressure following the assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri. Lebanese Defense Minister Abdul-Rahim Murad said the troops will be withdrawn to the eastern Bekaa Valley on the Syrian border, but he gave no timeframe. Lebanese and Syrian military officers have begun meetings to define "the dates and the way" the withdrawal will take place, Murad said, adding that the pullback was in line with the Arab-brokered Taif agreement that ended Lebanon's 1975-90 civil war. "The decision to withdraw has been taken," Murad said in television interviews. "What remains is the exact timing." In the wake of Hariri's February 14, 2005 assassination, the Bush administration has issued strong calls for Syria to withdraw completely from Lebanon, where Damascus has about 15,000 troops. The Americans have also said Syria should remove its intelligence agents, but there was no sign of such a move. A U.S. official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the United States has not been notified about a withdrawal and it remains to be seen how many troops would be removed from Lebanon and when the pullout would occur. Israel, which withdrew its forces from Lebanon in 2000 after an 18-year guerrilla war against the militant group Hezbollah, welcomed Syria's announcement. But an Israeli official, also speaking on condition of anonymity, added that Israel would have to study the Syrian declaration to determine if it promised a real change. Murad's comments came shortly after Syria announced it would withdraw troops from Lebanon in accordance with the Taif accord but indicated the pullout would not be immediate or total. "The important withdrawals which have already been carried out and what will be carried out later will be in agreement with Lebanon based on the Taif Accord," the Syrian Foreign Ministry statement said. The Syrian statement, read to journalists by deputy Foreign Minister Walid Mouallem, did not give a timetable but noticeably referred to "withdrawals," and not just deployment, the term used for past troop movements. Syria also indicated the withdrawal will not be complete and sought to explain why it would not immediately take such a step. "Speeding up the pace of withdrawals requires enabling the Lebanese army and internal security forces to fill the vacuum that could take place in a way that does not undermine the security of Lebanon and Syria," the statement said. There was no sign of any troop movement in Lebanon, where Syria is the main power broker. Syria once had more than 40,000 troops into Lebanon during the civil war and for years has pledged to implement the Taif agreement. It has redeployed troops several times since 2000-most recently in December, when it pulled plainclothes soldiers out of three security and intelligence centers in Beirut and north Lebanon. It still maintained other intelligence offices in the city, however. It never implemented a withdrawal to the eastern Bekaa Valley, a predominantly Shiite area that borders on Syria that was scheduled for the early 1990s. The accord also calls for an eventual total pullout. A U.N. Security Council resolution in September demanded Syria withdraw its troops, and President Bush increased the pressure Wednesday, reiterating that "the position of our government is Syria must withdraw not only the troops, but its secret services from Lebanon." The Syrian statement warned against "provocation and incitement from some inside Lebanon and abroad," saying such behavior may damage the interests of all parties, particularly Lebanon. The Lebanese opposition has accused the pro-Syrian Lebanese government and Syria of having a hand in the assassination of Hariri, who was tilting toward the opposition as Lebanon prepares to hold parliamentary elections in April and May. Hariri and 16 others died in a bombing that destroyed his motorcade of armor-plated vehicles. More than 100 people were injured. Since then, loud and massive demonstrations have been held against Syria and the Damascus-allied Lebanese government, as well as calls for Syria to withdraw its troops. The United Nations, Washington and others joined with Hariri's family to demand an international investigation into the bombing. Lebanon has expressed willingness to cooperate with international experts.

Syria is implementing the U.N. Security Council resolution calling for the withdrawal of its forces from Lebanon, Syrian Foreign Minister Farouk al-Sharaa said on March 21, 2005. "After this, how is it possible to attack Syria? To continue the threats and for the American administration to hint at that?" al-Sharaa said, referring to U.S. pressure on Syria. The United States has not said it is planning to attack Syria, but it has said repeatedly that Syria must do more to withdraw its troops from Lebanon and to stop supporters of the Iraqi insurgency from using Syrian territory. U.S. President George W. Bush said earlier this month that his administration was consulting with allies about possible steps to take if Syria refuses to withdraw promptly its troops and intelligence agents in Lebanon. The U.N. Security Council ruled in September that Syria must withdraw its forces from Lebanon and end its interference in Lebanese politics. Last week, Syria completed a withdrawal that saw 4,000 soldiers come home from Lebanon and the remaining 10,000 troops be confined to the eastern sector of Lebanon. The United States and the United Nations wants all Syria troops to leave Lebanon before the country's legislative elections begin in April. The Syrians have given no such commitment in public. Speaking in an interview with Lebanon's LBC television, al-Sharaa said: "We fear nothing, but we don't wish for this military intervention. Our cause is just and we call for dialogue with the American administration." He suggested that in Syria's most recent contacts with the United States, matters did not seem to be heading toward confrontation. "I will not hide that the last contact between us did not lead to a clash in real terms," he said. "We are demanding a better understanding of Syria's positions." The United States has criticized Syria for hosting members of radical Palestinian groups such as Hamas and Islamic Jihad, which have both been responsible for scores of suicide bombings in Israel. Syria regards these groups as legitimate opponents of Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory. Syria is on the U.S. list of terrorism-sponsoring nations and last year Bush imposed economic sanctions against Damascus. Al-Sharaa said his government would never accept U.S. domination. "We always used to say that the United States can lead the world as a superpower with a strong military, economy and media. But I don't believe anyone would accept to surrender to hegemony," al-Sharaa said.

Syria has only 1,000 troops left in Lebanon and they will be gone within seven days, ending Syria's 29-year military presence in Lebanon, a senior Lebanese military officer said on April 19, 2005. The accelerated withdrawal of Syria's troops and intelligence officers will meet Syria's April 30 deadline for a full pullout. What is more important, it should satisfy the U.N. Security Council, which is due to hear a report from Secretary-General Kofi Annan later this month on Syria's progress in complying with a 2004 resolution that demanded a full withdrawal from Lebanon. The United States and Annan had insisted that Syria leave Lebanon before its parliamentary elections-expected next month-in order for the polls to be free of outside influence. "The stepped-up Syrian troop pullout during the past few days has reduced the number of Syrian soldiers (in Lebanon) to about 1,000," the military officer told The Associated Press. "The remaining troops will be out of Lebanon by April 26, 2005." Last week, the Lebanese military said there were 4,000 Syrian soldiers left in Lebanon. In February, there were 14,000 Syrians in Lebanon, but the assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri on February 14, 2005 dramatically intensified the international and domestic pressure on Syria to leave. Syria's chief of military intelligence in Lebanon, Maj. Gen. Rustom Ghazale, will evacuate his base in the east Lebanese town of Anjar by April 26, the officer said, speaking on customary condition of anonymity. In the heydays of Syrian influence in Lebanon, local newspapers dubbed Ghazale as the de facto ruler of the country. Ghazale and Maj. Gen. Fayez al-Haffar, the commander of Syrian forces in Lebanon, paid a farewell call on President Emile Lahoud at his palace on Tuesday, a presidential official said. Syrian troops have now vacated all their positions in the central and western parts of the Bekaa Valley, eastern Lebanon, witnesses said Tuesday. The witnesses, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Lebanese troops promptly took over the posts. In the eastern part of the Bekaa, Syrian soldiers pulled out of Rayak in the early hours of Tuesday morning, witnesses said. Some 25 military trucks-carrying about 125 Syrian soldiers, arms and ammunition-crossed into Syria at the Masnaa border point, the witnesses said, speaking on condition of anonymity. Lebanese forces in Rayak will hold a small ceremony "to pay tribute to the Syrian Arab forces" for their role in Lebanon, the Lebanese military officer said. Syrian troops entered Lebanon in the second year of the country's 1975-90 civil war. They remained afterward, making Damascus the power broker of Lebanese politics. At their peak in the 1980s and 1990s, the Syrians numbered about 40,000 soldiers. Syria thus ended a 29-year occupation of Lebanon. Although its forces are out of Lebanon, Syria has not established diplomatic ties with Beirut.

Syrian President Bashir Assad told the U.N. secretary general on September 1, 2006, that Syria was prepared to establish diplomatic relations with Lebanon and delineate the border between the two countries, measures it has steadfastly resisted for six decades. Many in Lebanon said Assad's promises to U.N. chief Kofi Annan were likely to remain just talk unless international pressure mounts on Damascus. For Syria, the step would be seen as formal recognition that its decades-long domination of Lebanon which has crumbled the past year is truly over. Many in Lebanon suspect Syria has never really accepted Lebanon's independence and remains angered that parts of it were carved out of the former Syrian province of the Ottoman Empire in 1920. After talks with Assad in Damascus on Friday, Annan said the Syrian leader is prepared to establish diplomatic ties with Lebanon and set the border between the two countries. Assad made no public comments after the meeting. "These are nice, sugar-coated words... we know the Syrian doubletalk. They say one thing to international envoys and implement another thing on the ground," Lebanese Druse leader Walid Jumblatt, a virulently anti-Syrian politician, told Al-Arabiya. "What Assad told Annan is a kind of political maneuvering, nothing more," said Nicolas Nassif, an analyst with the Lebanese daily Al-Akhbar newspaper. "If Assad was serious about responding to international resolutions, we would have seen Syria improving its relations with Lebanon a long time ago." Earlier this year, the U.N. Security Council passed a resolution, sponsored by the United States, France and Britain, that urged Syria and Lebanon to demarcate their border and establish diplomatic relations. Syria has said it does not object to defining the border but wants it to take place at a later stage because of current tension between Damascus and Beirut's government dominated by anti-Syrian politicians. Damascus is at odds with the anti-Syrian leadership in Lebanon, which Assad has accused of being stooges of Israel and the West. Assad also said earlier this year that Syria is not opposed to establishing diplomatic relations with Lebanon, but added that no foreign power could impose such ties and that it was something to be discussed between the two neighbors. "Syria has always said, before and after the U.N. resolution, that it has no problem in demarcating the border and establishing diplomatic ties when the timing is right," said George Jabbour, a Syrian legislator and political analyst. He underlined that Syria has long acknowledged and accepted Lebanon's independence. Since 1943, when Syria and Lebanon gained independence from France, Damascus has sidestepped formal links with Beirut, saying their relationship is too close for diplomatic relations. Syria troops dominated its smaller neighbor since soon after Lebanon's civil war began in 1975, and by the time the war ended in 1990, Damascus controlled the country's politics. The situation continued until the February 2005 assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, which many in Lebanon blamed on Syria. International pressure, coupled with massive anti-Syrian demonstrations in Beirut, forced Syria to pull out its troops from the country, ending a 29-year military presence. Anti-Syrian politicians then won control of parliament and the government. A key issue in drawing the border is the question of the Shebaa Farms region, on the corner of Lebanon, the Golan Heights and Israel. Israel controls the area, and Syria has said it belongs to Lebanon giving its ally Hezbollah a reason to continue fighting Israeli occupation. The Lebanese government has signed onto that interpretation, though U.N. officials have said the region is part of the Golan Heights, a Syrian territory that Israel has held since 1967. Nassif noted that Annan's comments did not specify a Syrian willingness to resolve the Shebaa Farms issue. "I don't expect any real movement following Assad's meeting with Annan," Nassif said. "The truth is that unless the international community considerably steps up pressure on Syria to change its attitude toward Lebanon, one cannot extract any serious stance from the Syrians."

PS-SOURCES: New York Times January 30, 1948, March 25, 1948, January 6, 1949, March 15, 1950, March 6, 1954, February 17, 1957, November 9, 1963, August 5, 1968, November 14, 1969, March 9, 1970, November 3, 1976, February 3, 1977, February 13, 1978, February 25, 1980, April 19, 1987, December 15, 1999, BBC July 20, 1983, March 5, 1984, The London Times August 21, 1989, United Press International May 22, 1991, Deutsche Presse-Agentur January 1, 1996, Inter Press Service October 8, 1998, Associated Press Worldstream July 15, 2003, February 24, 2005, March 21, 2005, April 19, 2005, May 12, 2006, September 1, 2006

20081014-20159999 .50

On 14 October 2008, Syria formally recognizes Lebanon for the first time since both gained independence and officially establishing diplomatic relations. Both countries have agreed to also work towards demarcating border between them and have also opened embassies in each other's countries. 

http://www.nbcnews.com/id/27184549/ns/world_news-mideast_n_africa/t/syria-establishes-diplomatic-ties-lebanon/#.WYps1xSvbFI

MARITIME-MIDS:

MARITIME-DISPUTE:

Discussion:

SOURCES: Gibler, D.M. 2018. Militarized Interstate Dispute Narratives, 1816-2010. Langham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. 
