FILE: cm710800v11.0.txt
DYAD: CHINA-THAILAND
RIVALRY: RIV1303
DISPUTE(S): MID51 MID1363 MID1353 MID611 MID1216 

PS: 19501001-19750630 0.25 19750701-20209999 0.5

PS-UPDATE2020:

PSNOTES: 

PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20220324
PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20220324

Territorial-Maritime-Boundary Issues Variables

MID51 

TERRMID: MID51 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID51 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID51 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID51 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID51 from cm002710 narrative, this MID is the Korean War. The US and UN forces fought along with the South Koreans, and China fought along with the North Koreans. North and South Korea were engaged in a territorial dispute in the Korean War, and China's and NATO's opposing support led them to fight directly, triggering this MID between them. Coded third party link to territorial MID because the territorial dispute in Korea led these countries to be involved in this multilateral MID. 

MARITMID: MID51 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID51 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: MID51 the Korean War involved the disputation of maritime boundaries between North and South Korea as well, since each side claimed the entirety of each other's territory. Coded not maritime because China and Thailand did not dispute a maritime boundary here, although they are linked to the maritime element of the dispute. 

ISLMID: MID51 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID51 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: MID51 the Korean War involved the disputation of islands off the coast of the Korean Peninsula as well, since each side claimed the entirety of each other's territory. Coded not islands because Thailand and China were not disputing islands here, but they were linked to the islands element of the Korean dispute here. 

CIVWARMID: MID51 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID51 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID51 1 -- civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID51 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID51 coded civil war link because the Korean War has a civil war element. Like China, Korea was divided along communist vs nationalist lines, and these two groups eventually fought the Korean War. That war is considered a civil war since the primary disputants were Koreans, and the peninsula was not divided into two states until after WWII, when it also becomes a territorial dispute. North and South Korea claim the entirety of each other's territory and see the opposing regime essentially as a militarized group illegitimately controlling part of the peninsula. Coded civil war link because the Korean civil war is outside of this dyad, and the UN forces and China fought here due to their opposing support in that war. 

COUPMID: MID51 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID51 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID51 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID51 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES:

MID1363

TERRMID: MID1363 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID1363 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID1363 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID1363 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID1363 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID1363 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID1363 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID1363 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID1363 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID1363 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID1363 1 -- civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID1363 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID1363 from Gibler 2018, this is the Laotian Civil War, an internationalized civil war that involves China, Russia, and North Vietnam supporting the communist rebels in Laos, and US and Thailand supporting the Royalist forces led by Prince Sihanouk. The opposing support by third party countries in this dyad pulls them all into this MID against each other. China is pulled into this MID against Thailand due to their opposing support. Coded civil war link because this was connected to the civil war in Laos, outside this dyad. 

COUPMID: MID1363 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID1363 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID1363 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID1363 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID1353 

TERRMID: MID1353 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID1353 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID1353 this is connected to the Laotian Civil War, and China and Thailand's opposing support. That conflict did not have a territorial dispute element; it was purely civil war in nature. See CIVWARLINK.

MARITMID: MID1353 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID1353 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID1353 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID1353 1 -- civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID1353 from cm002710 narrative and Gibler 2018, this is related to the Laotian Civil War that takes place from 1963 to 1973. China directly supported the Pathet Lao communist insurgency and conducted military operations in northern Laos, and the USSR provided less direct support to communist insurgents. The US, UK, Thailand, Australia, and New Zealand supported the Royal Laotian Government (RLG) forces. The opposing support by China and Thailand pulls them into this MID against each other. Coded civil war link because this was connected to the Laotian Civil War. 

COUPMID: MID1353 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID1353 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID611

TERRMID: MID611 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID611 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID611 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID611 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID611 from Gibler 2018, this is the Vietnam War, an internationalized civil war that has a territorial dispute element between North and South Vietnam. The US, South Korea, Thailand, Cambodia, Philippines, Australia, and New Zealand supported South Vietnam, and USSR and China supported North Vietnam. Thailand and China's opposing support pulls them into this MID against each other. COded third party link to territorial MID because this was connected to a territorial dispute between North and South Vietnam. 

MARITMID: MID611 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID611 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID611 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID611 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID611 3 -- not civil war
CIVWARMID-CER: MID611 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARLINK: MID611 1 -- civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID611 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID611 coded civil war link because the Vietnam War is an internationalized civil war occurring outside this dyad. 

COUPMID: MID611 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID611 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID611 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID611 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID1216

TERRMID: MID1216 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID1216 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID1216 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID1216 3 -- uncertain
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID1216 from Gibler, Miller, and Little 2016, this MID occurs during the Vietnam War and involves the US and South Vietnam's attacks on Cambodia. As part of the Vietnam War, South Vietnam was fighting against communist guerillas, and the US and South Vietnam crossed into Cambodia to attack communist rebels hiding across the border. Coded third party link to territorial MID because this was connected to the Vietnam War, a territorial dispute between North and South Vietnam. Coded uncertain because GML do not consider Thailand or China a party to this MID, and they recommend this MID be dropped altogether and combined with MID1213. 

MARITMID: MID1216 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID1216 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID1216 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID1216 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID1216 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID1216 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID1216 1 -- civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID1216 3 -- uncertain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID1216 coded civil war link because this was connected to the Vietnam War, an internationalized civil war outside this dyad. Coded uncertain because GML do not consider Thailand or China a party to this MID, and they recommend this MID be dropped altogether and combined with MID1213. 

COUPMID: MID1216 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID1216 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID1216 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID1216 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

RIVNOTES: 

NARRATIVE-CM:

SOURCES-CM:

NARRATIVE-CR:
The unifying element to the rivalry between China and Thailand is the ideological rift of the Cold War. Thailand was a close ally of the United States during the Cold War and China was clearly in the communist side of the Cold War. All of the MIDs that take place between the two countries take place in a multilateral context. No MIDs take place directly between the two countries. The MIDs all take place in the context of the proxy wars that populated the Cold War. The actual conflicts the two countries are involved in occurred in Korea, Laos, and Cambodia. Thailand and China are involved in MIDs in support of allied states in their rivalry. 

MID51 is the Korean War. Thailand had battalion-sized units attached to U.S. Army divisions during the war. Thailand also provided air transport units to the United Nations Command. They also provided four naval vessels in support of the UN Command. Thailand contributed an estimated 6,500 troops to the UN Command during the Korean War. China participated in the Korean War, probably more in response to American military threats as the American dominated UN forces in Korea pushed towards the Korean-Chinese border at the Yalu River in the fall of 1950. Mao's decision to lend direct military support was also a result of Stalin's refusal to provide the participation of Soviet Air Force units in the conflict. There are no references to direct targeting or contact expressly between the PRC and Thai forces during MID51. 

From December 29, 1960 until April 20, 1961 MID1363 occurs. In 1961, there was an internationalized civil war within Laos. North Vietnam, the USSR, and the Peoples Republic of China supported the Communist forces in northern Laos. The Royal Laotian Government (RLG) was supported by the USA and Thailand. There was considerable direct support from both the USA and the USSR. The USSR was airlifting supplies to the Pathet Lao while the USA was flying reconnaissance missions in support of the RLG. Neither the USA nor the USSR wanted the conflict to break out into a direct conflict between them. There was a push to resolve the conflict with a conference in Geneva. While preliminary discussion about having the conference in Geneva were ongoing, the Kennedy administration discussed intervention by SEATO. China warned Washington and Laos that should SEATO intervene it would intervene with direct military force. This threat constitutes MID1363.

MID1353 takes place during the second Laotian Civil War that occurs from 1963 until 1973. China is involved in direct support of the Pathet Lao from May of 1962 until July of 1964. China provided direct aid to the communist forces in Laos and conducted direct military operations in Northern Laos. Much of the activity China was involved in centered on completing a road network in Northern Laos that would connect North Vietnam, Laos and Thailand. The road network would provide access of supplies and troops for the communist groups in all three countries. Chinese forces were also involved in direct military confrontation with the Royal Laotian Government. 
Thailand was involved in the Second Laotian Civil War from 1962 until 1973. Thailand sent troops and equipment to the rightists in the country. 

MID611 is the Vietnam War. China was the first country to recognize the communist insurgent group, National Liberation Front (NLF), in South Vietnam. From 1964 until 1971, China committed 320,000 troops to the Vietnam War in support of North Vietnam and the NLF. Thailand was a close ally of the United States during the Vietnam War. Thailand provided military bases and combat forces to assist South Vietnam. 

MID1216 is a multilateral MID involving China and Cambodia on one side with Thailand, South Vietnam and the US on the other. Here the hostility centers around Cambodia. After cultivating close relations with the US in 1963 Cambodian Prince Sihanouk cancelled all military and economic aid from the US and broke of diplomatic relations with the US in 1965. He felt the Vietnamese Communists in South Vietnam were going to eventually win the struggle for power and entered into a compromise agreement with them. He allowed the NLF and North Vietnam to set up bases along the Cambodian border with South Vietnam and permitted the receipt of shipments at its main port from China and the USSR. Prince Sihanouk got in return the pledge that the Vietnamese would respect Cambodian independence. Additionally he received a pledge that the Vietnamese would not support the Khmer Rouge insurgency that was opposing the Prince. The US along with its allies Thailand and South Vietnam made several incursions into Cambodia in pursuit of Communist forces. In this MID Cambodia made threats to make reprisal attacks and implicitly called on China for assistance in threats to the US. 

The rivalry between China and Thailand has its last period of mutual involvement in a common MID during the Vietnam War. China exits the conflict in 1971 while Thailand ends involvement in 1973. Several developments of the 1970s allay hostilities between the two countries. 

After the Thai general election of 1975, a new civilian government headed by Prime Minister M.R. Kukrit Pramoj announced that his government would seek to establish diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of China. On July 1, 1975, the Prime Minister went to Beijing and signed a joint statement establishing diplomatic relations. Thailand's diplomatic recognition of the PRC in 1975 was a milestone in Thai-Chinese relations. It reversed the policy of hostility towards the PRC of the previous Thai governments.

After diplomatic recognition of the PRC was achieved in 1975, Thai-Chinese relations changed from enmity to friendship. The relationship in the beginning was not very close because the Thai were still apprehensive over continued Chinese support for the Communist Party of Thailand. Thai leaders pressed the Chinese to cease assistance but the Chinese kept telling the Thai that the party-to-party relations would not affect government-to-government relations.

The turnaround in the Sino-Thai relations after December 1978 occurred when the Vietnamese invaded and occupied Cambodia. The occupation brought the Vietnamese troops closer to the Thai border for the first time. The subsequent Vietnamese incursion into Thai territory at Non Mark Moon in Prachinburi province in July 1980 enhanced the Thai leadership's perception of the Vietnamese threat to Thai national security. Thailand faced a hostile and powerful enemy across the border.

Thailand saw the value of China after the Chinese in February 1979 attacked Vietnam along the border in order to teach the Vietnamese a lesson. China viewed the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia as an expansionist move to dominate the whole Indochina. Moreover, the close relationship between Vietnam and the Soviet Union made the Chinese apprehensive. Both Beijing and Bangkok recognized their mutual interest in resisting the expansion of Vietnamese influence in Indochina. China wanted to supply the Khmer Rouge with arms in the struggle to liberate Cambodia, and there was no better place for a logistics network than through Thailand. The Vietnamese occupation brought about a convergence of security interests between Thailand and China which in resulted in a strategic partnership. This strategic partnership covered many areas, strategic consultations, and arms transfers as well as arms sales.

Relations between Thailand and China improved steadily in the 1980s. In 1985, a telephone hotline was established between Thailand and China in an effort to coordinate their activities in the event of a major Vietnamese incursion into Thailand. Thai-Chinese relations further improved in a military assistance agreement signed in Beijing in May 1987. This agreement allowed Thailand to purchase, on agreeable terms, Chinese tanks, antiaircraft guns, missiles, ammunition, and armored personnel carriers. 

In more recent years, China has cultivated a more cooperative relationship with members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations which includes Thailand and has participated in the ASEAN Regional Forum.

SOURCES-CR: 
Bercovitch and Jackson, 1997, 93, 120; Chinwanno, 1998; Sandler, 1995; Tucker, 2000, 

PS-NARRATIVE: 

19459999-19490930 0.5

I was not able to find any relations between Thailand and Nationalist China during the period 1945-1949. There is one reference in Chinwanno that Thailand established diplomatic relations with Nationalist China's government in 1945. Given the limited interaction I coded this as a 0.5

19491001-19750631 RIV1303-0.25

After the Communist victory on October 1, 1949, Thailand's leaders became concerned with the ideology of Communist China which was also in stark contrast with the Thai ideology of `Nationhood, Buddhism, and Monarchy.' The creation of a Tai Dai Autonomous Region in Yunnan by Communist China was perceived as a threat by Thai leaders. The involvement of China in the Korean war increased the animosity between the two countries.

The unifying element to the rivalry between China and Thailand is the ideological rift of the Cold War. Thailand was a close ally of the United States during the Cold War and China was clearly in the communist side of the Cold War. All of the MIDs that take place between the two countries take place in a multilateral context. No MIDs take place directly between the two countries. The MIDs all take place in the context of the proxy wars that populated the Cold War. The actual conflicts the two countries are involved in occurred in Korea, Laos, and Cambodia. Thailand and China are involved in MIDs in support of allied states in their rivalry.

MID51 is the Korean War. Thailand had battalion-sized units attached to U.S. Army divisions during the war. Thailand also provided air transport units to the United Nations Command. They also provided four naval vessels in support of the UN Command. Thailand contributed an estimated 6,500 troops to the UN Command during the Korean War. China participated in the Korean War, probably more in response to American military threats as the American dominated UN forces in Korea pushed towards the Korean-Chinese border at the Yalu River in the fall of 1950. Mao's decision to lend direct military support was also a result of Stalin's refusal to provide the participation of Soviet Air Force units in the conflict. There are no references to direct targeting or contact expressly between the PRC and Thai forces during MID51.

From December 29, 1960 until April 20, 1961 MID1363 occurs. In 1961, there was an internationalized civil war within Laos. North Vietnam, the USSR, and the Peoples Republic of China supported the Communist forces in northern Laos. The Royal Laotian Government (RLG) was supported by the USA and Thailand. There was considerable direct support from both the USA and the USSR. The USSR was airlifting supplies to the Pathet Lao while the USA was flying reconnaissance missions in support of the RLG. Neither the USA nor the USSR wanted the conflict to break out into a direct conflict between them. There was a push to resolve the conflict with a conference in Geneva. While preliminary discussion about having the conference in Geneva were ongoing, the Kennedy administration discussed intervention by SEATO. China warned Washington and Laos that should SEATO intervene it would intervene with direct military force. This threat constitutes MID1363.

MID1353 takes place during the second Laotian Civil War that occurs from 1963 until 1973. China is involved in direct support of the Pathet Lao from May of 1962 until July of 1964. China provided direct aid to the communist forces in Laos and conducted direct military operations in Northern Laos. Much of the activity China was involved in centered on completing a road network in Northern Laos that would connect North Vietnam, Laos and Thailand. The road network would provide access of supplies and troops for the communist groups in all three countries. Chinese forces were also involved in direct military confrontation with the Royal Laotian Government. Thailand was involved in the Second Laotian Civil War from 1962 until 1973. Thailand sent troops and equipment to the rightists in the country.

MID611 is the Vietnam War. China was the first country to recognize the communist insurgent group, National Liberation Front (NLF), in South Vietnam. From 1964 until 1971, China committed 320,000 troops to the Vietnam War in support of North Vietnam and the NLF. Thailand was a close ally of the United States during the Vietnam War. Thailand provided military bases and combat forces to assist South Vietnam.

MID1216 is a multilateral MID involving China and Cambodia on one side with Thailand, South Vietnam and the US on the other. Here the hostility centers around Cambodia. After cultivating close relations with the US in 1963 Cambodian Prince Sihanouk cancelled all military and economic aid from the US and broke of diplomatic relations with the US in 1965. He felt the Vietnamese Communists in South Vietnam were going to eventually win the struggle for power and entered into a compromise agreement with them. He allowed the NLF and North Vietnam to set up bases along the Cambodian border with South Vietnam and permitted the receipt of shipments at its main port from China and the USSR. Prince Sihanouk got in return the pledge that the Vietnamese would respect Cambodian independence. Additionally he received a pledge that the Vietnamese would not support the Khmer Rouge insurgency that was opposing the Prince. The US along with its allies Thailand and South Vietnam made several incursions into Cambodia in pursuit of Communist forces. In this MID Cambodia made threats to make reprisal attacks and implicitly called on China for assistance in threats to the US.

The rivalry between China and Thailand has its last period of mutual involvement in a common MID during the Vietnam War. China exits the conflict in 1971 while Thailand ends involvement in 1973. Several developments of the 1970s allay hostilities between the two countries.

19750701-20159999 0.5

Thailand and Communist China established diplomatic relations on July 1, 1975. On November 5, 1978, the Chinese Vice-Premier Teng Hsiao-Ping conveyed China's invitation for Thailand's King Bhumibol Adulyadej and Queen Sirikit Kittiyakara to visit China at a time convenient to them. He also looked forward to the Princess mother Srinagarindra's visit to China at her convenient time. The invitation for her visit was extended by the late premier Chou En-Lai. The Thai king accepted the invitations with pleasure. The chinese vice-premier and his wife Cho Lin were received by the Thai King and Queen in the Chitra Lada Palace. They were accompanied by Thai Prime Minister Kriangsak and his wife Virat.

On November 6, 1979, newspapers in Bangkok in their editorials warmly acclaimed Chinese Prime-Minister Teng Hsiao-Ping's visit to Thailand. The editorial of "New Chinese Daily News" says that his visit has brought goodwill to Thailand. It will promote the friendship between the two countries, deepen mutual understanding and cooperation, and make contributions to the cause of peace in Southeast Asia. In March 1979, Thai Prime Minister Kriangsak Chomanan visited China personally which has laid a stable and solid foundation for a new relation between Thailand and China.

On October 30, 1980, the Thai Prime Minister, Prem Tinsulanon, was having talks in Peking with the Chinese leadership. As news agencies report, the main topic on their agenda is the discussion of the situation in Kampuchea. What role will Thailand play in these plans? Thailand seems to be assigned with a very improper part. Through China's efforts the Thai territory adjacent to the Kampuchean border has been turned into a base where terrorist groups are being formed out of the remaining Pol Pot bands. These groups receive Chinese arms and instructions from Chinese military experts attached to them. They are sent to Kampuchea to fight against the legitimate Government of Heng Samrin. China is doing all she can in order to discredit peace initiatives of the three Indochina countries aimed at normalizing the situation on the Kampuchean-Thai border. China is also inciting Thailand to actions that are bound to hinder the normalization of good-neighborly relations with Kampuchea.

The Thai Premier, General Prem Tinsulanon, has ended his five-day official visit to the PRC and returned to Thailand on 31st October, 1980. He briefed newsmen, saying that he had been accorded a great honor by the Chinese leaders-from their welcome as well as during the talks. He had the opportunity to raise freely topics for talks with them. The Premier said he discussed with the Chinese Premier, Zhao Ziyang, topics of mutual interest as well as topics of regional and international interest. The Premier told China that ASEAN members strictly upheld the UN resolution and wished to see the resolution implemented. China agreed with ASEAN. The UN resolution on Kampuchea is considered a world resolution. The two Premiers spent a great deal of time on this topic during their discussions. To sum up, China agreed with ASEAN and will also adopt the ASEAN stand in its approach to the Kampuchean problem. It can be said that the Kampuchean issue was the sole topic discussed between the PRC and Thailand on behalf of ASEAN. As for bilateral relations, the Premier said that the Minister of the Interior, Prathuang Kiratibut, had discussed Lao and Kampuchean refugees who are of Chinese ancestry. China stated its willingness to resettle these refugees if they wish to return to China. China will also provide financial aid for their resettlement. The Premier said that the Deputy Minister of Agriculture and co-operatives, Anat Aphaphirom, had discussed rice and rubber trade exchanges. The Minister of Communications, Admiral Amon Sirikaya, discussed international aviation. He believed there would be no problem regarding Thailand's request to have additional ports of call for Thai Airways Inter-national since this would be mutually beneficial. The Premier said China had given its assurance that it would assist Thailand with current oil supplies as well as future supplies, particularly when China is able to produce more.

The Chinese Premier Zhao Ziyang's visit to Thailand will surely promote the further development of the friendly relations between Thailand and China, said Thai foreign minister Siddhi Savetsila on January 31, 1981. He said that China was a trustworthy friend of Thailand. Premier Zhao Ziyang was the first Chinese premier to visit Thailand. The fact that he makes this visit shortly after his assumption of office shows that the Chinese government attaches great importance to the friendly Thailand-China relations. He pointed out that this is a friendly gesture not only to Thailand, but also to ASEAN because Thailand was one of its members.

Ye Fei, Commander of the Chinese Navy, was visiting Thailand on March 23, 1982. He declared that China's military aid to Thailand would be increased. Deng Xiaoping once pointed out: If Thailand comes under attack, China will step forward to safeguard that country.

On November 16, 1982, it was announced that economic and technical cooperation between China and Thailand has made fresh progress in recent years, with two-way trade increased almost 23 times since 1975. The turnover between the two countries this year is expected to reach 500 million US dollars, as against 21 million in 1975 when the two countries established diplomatic relations. Thanks to a steady expansion in the scope of trade, the two countries now exchange hundreds of products including petroleum products, textiles, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, hardware and machinery. In the past two years, Thailand imported from china 2,000 looms and spinning machines with 130,000 spindles. In 1980 China supplied an oil-starved Thailand with crude and diesel oil worth 190 million US dollars and to offset Thailand's deficit in her trade with china, primarily caused by oil imports, china this year bought from Thailand more rice than agreed, but at preferential prices offered by Bangkok. Scientific and technical cooperation has also expanded since an agreement was concluded in 1978. Experts of the two countries have been making joint research in dozens of domains, including rural construction, breeding of better paddy varieties, cultivation of tropical fruit trees and building of small-sized hydro-power stations. Beijing ducks have begun propagating in Thailand while China has introduced from Thailand the technique of fish and shrimp breeding.

The Thai foreign minister Siddhi Savetsila declared in Bangkok on July 30, 1983, that Thailand was satisfied with China's support for the peaceful solution to the Kampuchean problem as advocated by the ASEAN countries. He said: "Thailand believes that China's support for ASEAN's effort to this effect will favor the eventual peaceful solution of the Kampuchean problem, notwithstanding existing obstacles." Siddhi was speaking at a dinner in honor of the Chinese foreign minister Wu Xueqian, who is on his first visit to Bangkok since he assumed the post in 1983. Siddhi said that Wu's visit to Thailand offered an opportunity for both sides to exchange views on ways and means to solve the Kampuchean problem, which Thailand and other ASEAN member countries "regard as the key to peace and stability in southeast Asia."

Thailand will not involve in the war of Kampuchea, but will, by diplomatic and political means and with the aid of its armed forces, defend its territorial integrity and obstruct any external threat. The Thai foreign minister Siddhi Savtsila made this remark on December 12, 1985, when he was delivering a speech in an electioneering meeting of the social action party's parliamentary candidates. He said that China has held down two third of Vietnam's crack troops in the China-Vietnam border in opposition to the Vietnamese occupation of Kampuchea. Kukrit Pramoj, the former Prime Minister of Thailand and the chairman of the Thailand-China friendship association, said at the same meeting that: "during the decade since the establishment of diplomatic relations between Thailand and China, both countries have been devoting their efforts jointly in establishing regional peace." Kukrit Pramoj pointed out that China does not only take common stance with Thailand on the Kampuchea issue, but has also rendered economical assistance to Thailand in various ways, such as buying Thailand's unsalable agricultural products and cane sugar. `China sympathizes with Thailand and is truly sincere to us", he added.

Thailand's army chief left on November 22, 1988, for China for talks expected to focus on buying more arms and the possibility of stockpiling Chinese-supplied arms in Thailand, military sources said. Gen. Chavalit Yongchaiyudh was accompanied by navy Commander-in-Chief Adm. Prapas Krisnachan for the visit during which Thailand and China are expected to sign a major arms deal involving sales of 30 Chinese-built tanks, 800 armored personnel carriers and spare parts, the sources said. Also up for discussion is the possibility of setting up a war reserve stockpile from which Thailand could draw Chinese-supplied weaponry in event of a threat to its national security. A similar arrangement has been set up with the United States. The Thai military has said arms purchases from China are necessary to bolster Thailand's defense capabilities against Vietnamese troops across the Thai-Cambodian border. The Vietnamese, who invaded Cambodia in late 1978, are regarded as Thailand's main external security threat. Although Thailand buys most of its weaponry from the United States, it has recently obtained tanks, armored personnel carriers and anti-aircraft guns from Beijing. In July 1988, the navy bought four Chinese-made frigates and is considering buying small submarines for operations in the shallow Gulf of Thailand, the Thai newspaper The Nation reported. A commentary in Vietnam's official Communist Party newspaper Nhan Dan on November 20, 1988, attacked military cooperation between China and Thailand and the support of the two countries for Cambodian resistance groups fighting the Vietnamese in Cambodia. China is the main supplier of weapons to the three-party resistance forces that include the communist Khmer Rouge. Thai Foreign Ministry spokesman Saroj Chavanaviraj called the statements "interference" in Thailand's affairs, adding: "To buy (Chinese weapons) or not is a Thai military decision."

Thai Prime Minister Chatchai Chunhawan received Chinese Vice Foreign Minister Liu Shuqing on 21st July, 1989. After the meeting, a Chinese Foreign Ministry official told reporters that Liu briefed the Prime Minister about the recent student demonstrations in China, which later turned into turmoil and counter-revolutionary rebellion, and about the necessary and right measures taken by the Chinese government. Chatchai, the official said, told Liu of Thailand's concern about the recent situation in China, and that it now feels delight knowing that China has restored normal order. The official quoted Chatchai as saying that Thailand had been taking a cautious attitude to the Peking incident because Thai-Chinese relations have been very good and Thailand does not want such ties to be damaged. Chatchai also said that bilateral trade and exchanges are continuing, and that his government had not prevented any delegation from visiting China. Thailand hopes the situation in China will come to normal completely, he added. The official quoted Liu as saying that China is grateful for Thailand's understanding about what happened in China, and its right and friendly attitude to China in the last few months. Liu said China's foreign policy and its policy of opening to the outside world will remain unchanged. China will continue to develop friendly relations with Thailand, he said. Referring to the Kampuchean problem, Chatchai said that Thailand firmly demands Vietnam to withdraw its troops truly and thoroughly from Kampuchea before the end of September, and supports the establishment of a quadripartite coalition government to be headed by Samdech Norodom Sihanouk. He said Vietnamese withdrawal from Kampuchea and the establishment of the quadripartite coalition government are two basic stands of the Thai government. Liu Shuqing and Thai Foreign Minister Sitthi Sawetsila held talks to exchange views on Kampuchea, and on the forthcoming Paris international conference on Kampuchea. Sitthi told Liu about the 3rd-4th July foreign ministers' meeting of ASEAN in Brunei and said that ASEAN also stands for a thorough and lasting resolution of the Kampuchean issue. ASEAN groups Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand. In order to reach a thorough, just and reasonable settlement to the Kampuchean problem, Liu demanded Vietnam to pull its troops thoroughly and truly from Kampuchea under strict and effective international supervision and hoped a quadripartite coalition government to be set up in Kampuchea. Sitthi said Thailand and China take a common stand on the Kampuchean issue and that he hoped the two sides will co-operate further at the forthcoming Paris international conference on Kampuchea.

On April 9, 2002, Thailand and China have forged closer cooperation in communications in an effort to boost trade ties. They have held talks on the use of the Mekong River and as well as road and railway networks linking them with Laos, Myanmar, and India. The effort will open up more business opportunities in trade, investment, and tourism, with Thailand serving as the regional hub. As part of their cooperation in the area of communications, China has started a vessel service, operated by China Shipping Container Lines Company, to transport cargo directly from Thailand to the United States. Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra on 29 March 2002 presided over the welcoming ceremony for the company's first ship, which had arrived at Laem Chabang deep-sea port in the eastern province of Chon Buri. Thailand and China reached an agreement on the vessel service during the visit of Chinese Prime Minister Zhu Rongi to Thailand in 2001. On the occasion of the inauguration of the vessel service, the Chinese Prime Minister sent a congratulatory message to Prime Minister Thaksin, saying that this service was a significant achievement resulting from mutually beneficial cooperation. The message said that the cooperation would also enrich and invigorate the economic and trade cooperation between China and Thailand. The Chinese Prime Minister believes that the inauguration of this liner service will be conducive to the exploration of new markets, increase employment opportunities, and expand exports for Thailand. Prime Minister Thaksin said that the Chinese carrier could accommodate more than 2,000 containers. With this new service, Thai exporters would enjoy lower transportation costs and shorter time for delivery. He said that initially Thailand would save five billion baht a year in freight charges to the US West Coast. A total of 11 Chinese vessels will take turns transporting goods directly from Thailand to the US West Coast. The transportation route will be expanded to other areas as well in the future. The Mekong River also bonds Thailand with southern China. Although Thailand does not share a common border with China, they are only 100 kilometers apart, bonded by the Mekong River. There are currently 10 to 20 ships traveling from China to Chiang Saen District of Chiang Rai Province in northern Thailand for trade contacts. As a result of Mekong development, cross-border trade between Thailand and Yunnan Province of southern China has increased significantly. According to statistics compiled by the Ministry of Commerce, Thai exports to Yunnan in 2001 were 2,225 million baht, while imports from Yunnan came to 547 million baht. In the year 2000, almost 2,000 companies from 25 economies invested US $ 2,818 million in Yunnan. Hong Kong came first among the largest investors there, followed by the United States, Taiwan, Singapore, and Thailand. Yunnan has great potential for serving as a production base to export to third countries through the Mekong River. Thailand is striving to enhance its role as a gateway to Southern China. At the same time, Thailand and China are developing the "North-South Corridor" transportation network, which links Kunming of Southern China with Laos, northern Thailand and the Laem Chabang deep-sea port in the Gulf of Thailand. The "northern axis" is also being developed through the Singapore-Kunming Rail Link project, which connects Singapore, Thailand, Cambodia, Vietnam, and southern China. Minister of Transport and Communications Wanmuhamadnoor Matha said that Thailand and China would move closer together in their transport cooperation, and their cooperation in this area would serve as a model for ASEAN and Asia as a whole.

Thailand and China are targeting a more than a two-fold increase in bilateral trade to around 30 billion USD by 2010, aided by tariff cuts, Thailand's Board of Investment (BOI) said on July 19, 2004. "Our target is to increase (bilateral trade) to 30 billion USD by 2010" from 12 billion USD currently, BOI secretary general Somphong Wanapha told a press briefing, following a high level mission to Beijing. Somphong said the expansion in trade is expected to be driven by cheaper agricultural goods as a result of tariff cuts agreed by the two sides under a partial free trade agreement. He said China's moves to slow the frenetic pace of its economy could also benefit Thailand as investors switch funds into other Asian countries. "The Chinese market has very, very big potential ... (but) after China's government planned to put a brake on its economic expansion, companies are looking elsewhere to expand and Thailand is a major destination," he said. "They are shifting operations to Thailand from China because they think the market there (China) is saturated and there is a more liberal investment regime here." Domestic and foreign investment in the first nine months of the fiscal year to October 2004 reached 8.5 billion USD, exceeding the government's full-year target of 6.7 billion USD. In the first half of this year however, foreign direct investment applications were down 20 pct from the same period a year ago at 2.85 billion. Thailand has said it will offer tax breaks to new investors in key industries such as the automobile, agriculture and electronics sectors in order to attract more foreign investment into the country, Somphong said.

On July 1, 2005, Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao told his Thai counterpart Thaksin Shinawatra that China wants to take the 30th founding anniversary of China-Thailand ties as an opportunity to strengthen its strategic cooperation with Thailand. During official talks with Thaksin, who is in China for a three-day official visit, Wen said China also hopes the business circles of the two countries would improve economic and trade cooperation and join hands for the exploitation and utilization of new energy resources. He also suggests the two countries improve cooperation in such areas as security, culture and tourism and actively implement the action plan of the China-ASEAN strategic partnership to push forward the Asian regional cooperation. The Chinese premier also highlighted China-Thailand relations, saying that the bilateral ties are moving forward steadily over the past 30 years. "China and Thailand are sincere friends," Wen said, adding that the development of bilateral ties have not only benefited the two peoples but also helped promote regional peace and development. "To consolidate and develop China-Thailand good-neighborly friendly cooperation is the Chinese government's established policy. China is ready to continue to work with Thailand to promote the China-Thailand friendly cooperation," Wen said. Thaksin said his visit to China on the occasion of the 30th anniversary of China-Thailand diplomatic ties demonstrates Thai people's deep friendship to the Chinese people. "Thailand and China are like brothers and we are friends in need," Thaksin said. He also expressed his government's appreciation for China's timely help to Thailand after the massive tsunami disaster on December 26, 2004. "To continuously deepen Thailand-China friendship and develop bilateral strategic cooperative relations is not only the Thai government's unswerving policy but also Thai people's wish," Thaksin said. He also expressed warm welcome to Chinese enterprises, saying that he hoped Chinese companies would join hands with Thai partners in the exploration of biological energy as well as oil and gas resources. He said Thailand also wants to increase investment in China and improve cooperation with the Pearl River Delta region in south China. On the upcoming second summit of the Greater Mekong Subregion on Economic Cooperation Program, Wen said China attaches great importance to the meeting and is willing to work closely with other countries in the region to push the regional cooperation into a more practical way. After hour-long talks between the two prime ministers, China and Thailand signed four cooperative documents covering areas of biological technology, quarantine inspection, environmental protection and financial cooperation. At the signing ceremony, China also handed over to the Thai government the test data of nearly 1,100 DNA samples from the victims, who were killed in the massive tsunami on Dec. 26, 2004.

PS-SOURCES: Chinwanno (2008), Xinhua March 26, 1978, November 6, 1978, November 6, 1979, January 31, 1981, November 16, 1982, July 30, 1983, June 26, 1985, December 12, 1985, BBC October 30, 1980, November 3, 1980, March 23, 1982, July 24, 1989, May 1, 1999, Associated Press November 22, 1988, AFX-Asia July 19, 2004, July 1, 2005, Thai Press Reports April 9, 2002

MARITIME-MIDS:

MARITIME-DISPUTE:

Discussion:

SOURCES: Gibler, D.M. 2018. Militarized Interstate Dispute Narratives, 1816-2010. Langham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. 

Gibler, D. M., S. V. Miller, and E. K. Little. 2016. "An Analysis of the Militarized Interstate Dispute (MID) Dataset, 1816-2001." International Studies Quarterly. 60 (4): 719-730.
