FILE: cm710920v11.0.txt
DYAD: CHINA-NEW ZEALAND
RIVALRY: RIV1312
DISPUTE(S): MID51 MID1353 MID611 

RIVNOTES: 

PS: 19501001-19721221 0.25 19721222-20209999 0.5

PS-UPDATE2020:

PSNOTES: relationship starts when china becomes a major regional power in 1950.

PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20220324
PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20220324

Territorial-Maritime-Boundary Issues Variables

MID51 

TERRMID: MID51 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID51 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID51 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID51 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID51 from cm002710 narrative, this MID is the Korean War. The US and UN forces fought along with the South Koreans, and China fought along with the North Koreans. North and South Korea were engaged in a territorial dispute in the Korean War, and China's and NATO's opposing support led them to fight directly, triggering this MID between them. Coded third party link to territorial MID because the territorial dispute in Korea led these countries to be involved in this multilateral MID. 

MARITMID: MID51 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID51 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: MID51 the Korean War involved the disputation of maritime boundaries between North and South Korea as well, since each side claimed the entirety of each other's territory. Coded not maritime because China and New Zealand did not dispute a maritime boundary here, although they are linked to the maritime element of the dispute. 

ISLMID: MID51 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID51 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: MID51 the Korean War involved the disputation of islands off the coast of the Korean Peninsula as well, since each side claimed the entirety of each other's territory. Coded not islands because New Zealand and China were not disputing islands here, but they were linked to the islands element of the Korean dispute here. 

CIVWARMID: MID51 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID51 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID51 1 -- civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID51 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID51 coded civil war link because the Korean War has a civil war element. Like China, Korea was divided along communist vs nationalist lines, and these two groups eventually fought the Korean War. That war is considered a civil war since the primary disputants were Koreans, and the peninsula was not divided into two states until after WWII, when it also becomes a territorial dispute. North and South Korea claim the entirety of each other's territory and see the opposing regime essentially as a militarized group illegitimately controlling part of the peninsula. Coded civil war link because the Korean civil war is outside of this dyad, and the UN forces and China fought here due to their opposing support in that war. 

COUPMID: MID51 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID51 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID51 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID51 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES:

MID1353 

TERRMID: MID1353 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID1353 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID1353 this is connected to the Laotian Civil War, and China and New Zealand's opposing support. That conflict did not have a territorial dispute element; it was purely civil war in nature. See CIVWARLINK.

MARITMID: MID1353 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID1353 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID1353 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID1353 1 -- civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID1353 from cm002710 narrative and Gibler 2018, this is related to the Laotian Civil War that takes place from 1963 to 1973. China directly supported the Pathet Lao communist insurgency and conducted military operations in northern Laos, and the USSR provided less direct support to communist insurgents. The US, UK, Thailand, Australia, and New Zealand supported the Royal Laotian Government (RLG) forces. The opposing support by China and New Zealand pulls them into this MID against each other. Coded civil war link because this was connected to the Laotian Civil War. 

COUPMID: MID1353 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID1353 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID611

TERRMID: MID611 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID611 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID611 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID611 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID611 from Gibler 2018, this is the Vietnam War, an internationalized civil war that has a territorial dispute element between North and South Vietnam. The US, South Korea, Thailand, Cambodia, Philippines, Australia, and New Zealand supported South Vietnam, and USSR and China supported North Vietnam. New Zealand and China's opposing support pulls them into this MID against each other. Coded third party link to territorial MID because this was connected to a territorial dispute between North and South Vietnam. 

MARITMID: MID611 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID611 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID611 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID611 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID611 3 -- not civil war
CIVWARMID-CER: MID611 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARLINK: MID611 1 -- civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID611 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID611 coded civil war link because the Vietnam War is an internationalized civil war occurring outside this dyad. 

COUPMID: MID611 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID611 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID611 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID611 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

NARRATIVE-CM:

SOURCES-CM:

NARRATIVE-CR:
The MIDs between China and New Zealand have one thing in common: the ideological differences between the two countries. In the Cold War context, New Zealand was clearly in the pro-western, anti-communist camp while the PRC was in the communist camp. All of the MIDs that take place between the two countries are multilateral. There are no bilateral MIDs between them. Therefore there is not a rivalry in the sense that the two states have targeted and identified one another as a rival state with one or two issues over which they compete or dispute. In other words, the Chinese do not go after New Zealand individually over a specific issue or contention between the two states or vice versa. Instead the two states backed other allied states up in Cold War proxy wars vying for control and influence of the political organization of states in Asia. 

The three MIDs that take place between China and New Zealand are the Korean War, MID51, intervention in the Laotian Civil War in support of New Zealand's western ally Thailand in MID1353, and the Vietnam War MID611. 

In the Korean War, MID51 July 1950 until July 1953, New Zealand played a small but significant role in the UN agencies and within the overall British Commonwealth organization that fought as part of the UN Command (UNC). From the onset of hostilities in Korea New Zealand committed ground and naval units to the UNC. One of the major consequences for New Zealand in the Korean War was the signing of the Australia-New Zealand-Unites States (ANZUZ) treaty in 1951. China participated in the Korean War, probably more in response to American military threats as the American dominated UN forces in Korea pushed towards the Korean-Chinese border at the Yalu River in the fall of 1950. Mao's decision to lend direct military support was also a result of Stalin's refusal to provide the participation of Soviet Air Force unites in the conflict. There are no references to direct targeting or contact expressly between the PRC and New Zealand forces during MID51. 

MID1353 is another multilateral MID revolving around the Laotian Civil War. New Zealand is involved from 5/20/1962 until 11/20/1962 while China is involved from 05/3/1962 until July of 1964. Here New Zealand and Australia augmented a squadron of British fighter jets that were deployed to Thailand. Thailand was threatened by the communist insurgents in Laos and has a communist insurgent group of its own to deal with at the time. Western powers are determined to keep Thailand in the west leaning camp and thus aid the country with material support. New Zealand did not experience combat during its deployment to Thailand. China on the other hand is alleged to have directly aided the Pathet Lao in northern Laos during this period. They are alleged to have supported the Pathet Lao with both logistical support and direct military involvement. There is some question as to whether the Chinese actually were involved in the dispute directly. Again, there is no reference to direct targeting of militarized action between China and New Zealand in MID1353.

MID611 is the Vietnam War. New Zealand sent troops for direct and indirect support of the government of South Vietnam based on the rationale that the decline of British power made New Zealand's security dependent on the United States. New Zealand felt that communism in Southeast Asia was a threat to its vital interests and therefore sent troops to Vietnam. New Zealanders serving in Vietnam served with Australian units. For its part, China was the first country to recognize the communist insurgent group, National Liberation Front (NLF), in South Vietnam. From 1964 until 1971, China committed 320,000 troops to the Vietnam War in support of North Vietnam and the NLF. Finally, as in the other cases there is no reference to direct targeting of militarized behavior on either side towards the other in the Vietnam War MID611. 

In sum, the rivalry between China and New Zealand, I would argue, is not a rivalry. The MIDs that take place between the countries do have a unifying element in the ideological differences, but they clearly take place in the larger global rivalry between east and west, communism versus liberal/capitalism. The two countries do not target one another as rival states individually, the way say China and India do or the way China and Taiwan do. Instead the MIDs that take place between the two countries take place in multilateral contexts that are embedded in the larger global ideological rivalry that was the Cold War. 

SOURCES-CR: 
Facts on File, 5/15/1962, 5/25-5/29/1962; Sandler, 1995, 40-43, 246-247; Tucker, 1998, 70-71; 288-289. 

PS-NARRATIVE: 

19459999-19490930 0.5

19491001-19721221 RIV1312-0.25

The Peoples' Republic of China was established on October 1, 1949. The MIDs between China and New Zealand have one thing in common: the ideological differences between the two countries. In the Cold War context, New Zealand was clearly in the pro-western, anti-communist camp while the PRC was in the communist camp. All of the MIDs that take place between the two countries are multilateral. There are no bilateral MIDs between them. Therefore there is not a rivalry in the sense that the two states have targeted and identified one another as a rival state with one or two issues over which they compete or dispute. In other words, the Chinese do not go after New Zealand individually over a specific issue or contention between the two states or vice versa. Instead the two states backed other allied states up in Cold War proxy wars vying for control and influence of the political organization of states in Asia.

The three MIDs that take place between China and New Zealand are the Korean War, MID51, intervention in the Laotian Civil War in support of New Zealand's western ally Thailand in MID1353, and the Vietnam War MID611.

In the Korean War, MID51 July 1950 until July 1953, New Zealand played a small but significant role in the UN agencies and within the overall British Commonwealth organization that fought as part of the UN Command (UNC). From the onset of hostilities in Korea New Zealand committed ground and naval units to the UNC. One of the major consequences for New Zealand in the Korean War was the signing of the Australia-New Zealand-Unites States (ANZUZ) treaty in 1951. China participated in the Korean War, probably more in response to American military threats as the American dominated UN forces in Korea pushed towards the Korean-Chinese border at the Yalu River in the fall of 1950. Mao's decision to lend direct military support was also a result of Stalin's refusal to provide the participation of Soviet Air Force unites in the conflict. There are no references to direct targeting or contact expressly between the PRC and New Zealand forces during MID51.

MID1353 is another multilateral MID revolving around the Laotian Civil War. New Zealand is involved from 5/20/1962 until 11/20/1962 while China is involved from 05/3/1962 until July of 1964. Here New Zealand and Australia augmented a squadron of British fighter jets that were deployed to Thailand. Thailand was threatened by the communist insurgents in Laos and has a communist insurgent group of its own to deal with at the time. Western powers are determined to keep Thailand in the west leaning camp and thus aid the country with material support. New Zealand did not experience combat during its deployment to Thailand. China on the other hand is alleged to have directly aided the Pathet Lao in northern Laos during this period. They are alleged to have supported the Pathet Lao with both logistical support and direct military involvement. There is some question as to whether the Chinese actually were involved in the dispute directly. Again, there is no reference to direct targeting of militarized action between China and New Zealand in MID1353.

MID611 is the Vietnam War. New Zealand sent troops for direct and indirect support of the government of South Vietnam based on the rationale that the decline of British power made New Zealand's security dependent on the United States. New Zealand felt that communism in Southeast Asia was a threat to its vital interests and therefore sent troops to Vietnam. New Zealanders serving in Vietnam served with Australian units. For its part, China was the first country to recognize the communist insurgent group, National Liberation Front (NLF), in South Vietnam. From 1964 until 1971, China committed 320,000 troops to the Vietnam War in support of North Vietnam and the NLF. Finally, as in the other cases there is no reference to direct targeting of militarized behavior on either side towards the other in the Vietnam War MID611.

In sum, the rivalry between China and New Zealand, I would argue, is not a rivalry. The MIDs that take place between the countries do have a unifying element in the ideological differences, but they clearly take place in the larger global rivalry between east and west, communism versus liberal/capitalism. The two countries do not target one another as rival states individually, the way say China and India do or the way China and Taiwan do. Instead the MIDs that take place between the two countries take place in multilateral contexts that are embedded in the larger global ideological rivalry that was the Cold War.

19721222-20159999 0.5

New Zeeland and Australia, on December 22, 1972, announced the establishment of diplomatic relations with Communist China and the end of relations with Nationalist China. The personnel of Nationalist embassies in both countries have been given deadlines for departure. The Australian deadline for the Nationalist Ambassador S.C. Shen was Jan 25, 1973. Australia and Communist China will exchange ambassadors as soon as arrangements were completed. Australia acknowledges the position of Chinese Communist Government that Taiwan is a province of People's Republic of China. Australian Prime Minister Whitlam said, on December 22, 1972, that ties with Peking have 'corrected a serious distortion in Australia's foreign policy'. The accord was concluded in Paris by the Australian Ambassador to France A. Renouf and the Chinese Ambassador Huang Chen.

The Standing Committee of the National People's Congress gave a banquet on April 12, 1977, for the visiting New Zealand parliamentary delegation led by Roy Jack, speaker of the House of Representatives. Wu Teh Ngapo Ngawang-Jigme, vice-chairmen of the NPC standing committee, were present at the banquet. Vice-Chairman Wu Teh and speaker Roy Jack spoke at the banquet, which proceeded in a friendly atmosphere. Vice-Chairman Wu Teh in his speech reviewed the development of China-New Zealand relations. He said: "the establishment of diplomatic relations between China and New Zealand in 1972 opened a new chapter in the annals of relations between our two countries. In 1976, Prime Minister Muldoon paid a visit to China, further enhancing the mutual understanding and friendship between our two countries. In recent years, the development of the relations between our two countries has been satisfactory."

New Zealand deputy Prime Minister Brian Talboys said before his departure from China on May 16, 1979, that his discussions with the Chinese leaders were "comprehensive and valuable" and that his visit "is a significant step forward in further developing the relations between China and New Zealand." In an interview in Guangzhou, he told Xinhua that New Zealand shares identical views with China on a number of fundamental international issues. "The present situation in Indo-China is dangerous and unstable," he said, adding that the principle for settlement of the Indo-China question is that "all armed forces must withdraw from the territory of other country, especially from the territory of Kampuchea." He said: "the expansionist policy of any country, must be opposed. Countries must respect each other's sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence. All the countries in the world need a peaceful environment to develop the economy, improve the living standards of the people and make full use of their national resources." This was his second visit to China. One of the purposes of his visit, deputy Prime Minister Talboys said, was to acquaint himself with China's modernization program, the priority projects in construction and the solutions to the problem of funds, and explore the possibilities of expanding economic cooperation between the two countries.

Robert Muldoon, Prime Minister of New Zealand, said in Guangzhou on September 18, 1980, that his China visit has left a deep impression on him. He made the comment in an interview with Xinhua in the guesthouse before leaving China. The New Zealand Prime Minister said: "I think it was very important for me to talk to the new Chinese Premier Zhao Ziyang so soon after his appointment and to have from him and chairman Hua Guofeng and vice-chairmen Deng Xiaoping and Li Xiannian an explanation of the new economic policies and the new leadership policies, which will be so important to the future of China in the years immediately ahead. "In international affairs," he said, "it's apparent that in many respects New Zealand's policies and those of China's are very close. I was aware of that, and this visit confirms it." The total trade volume between China and New Zealand in 1979 reached 114 million US dollars. In 1978, New Zealand granted Chinese commodities treatment of preferential tariffs, which is given generally to developing countries. This promoted the development of trade between the two countries. Encouraging progress has been made in Sino-New Zealand scientific and technical cooperation such as in the fields of agronomy, soil improvement, forestry, animal husbandry, agriculture, textile processing, tanning and processing of dairy products. To learn from the experience of New Zealand in developing animal husbandry, Chinese departments concerned signed a contract with a New Zealand corporation on establishing a demonstration livestock farm in subtropical Guangxi. New Zealand specialists have already arrived there and it is estimated that the project will yield results in about three years. Prime Minister Muldoon said it is very important to enhance economic exchanges between New Zealand and China. During his visit to Guilin and Fujian, Prime Minister Muldoon had discussions with local leaders on developing bilateral economic relations. The Prime Minister said New Zealand could provide assistance to China in many fields. This was Prime Minister Muldoon's second visit to china in four years. "The warm welcome and hospitality given us by the Chinese government and people made our journey more pleasant and successful," he said.

On April 5, 1981, Premier Zhao Ziyang expressed satisfaction with the relations between China and New Zealand at a meeting with Sir John Richard Harrison, speaker of the house of representatives, and his party. Zhao Ziyang said that China was pleased with the relations between the two countries in all fields since the establishment of diplomatic relations. "Our views of converge or are very close to each other on many of today's important international issues." Both sides want to further strengthen their relations, he said. The Chinese premier said that china, now in the process of economic readjustment, will continue her policy of encouraging economic cooperation with other countries. `We see very good prospects for cooperation between China and New Zealand in animal husbandry, forestry and other fields," he said. Sir John said New Zealand wants to see a strong China. "This is not only important for China's own economic development, but also necessary for world peace," he said. Premier Zhao Ziyang asked Sir John to convey his regards to Prime Minister Robert Muldoon upon his return to New Zealand.

Chinese Vice-Premier Wan Li hosted a banquet for Deputy Prime Minister of New Zealand Geoffrey Palmer, Mrs Palmer and their party in Peking, on 20th March, 1987. Wan Li said that recent years in particular have seen a trend of dynamic development in Sino-New Zealand co-operative relations. ''All this shows clearly that there are many areas in which our two countries can supply each other's deficiencies and engage in mutually beneficial co-operation,'' he noted. Wan said that he believed Palmer's current visit to China would make a new contribution to better mutual understanding between the Chinese and New Zealand peoples, and to the further development of Sino-New Zealand friendly relations and co-operation. In reply, Palmer said both New Zealand and China hope to expand their relations rapidly. He said there are broad areas of co-operation between the two countries. He also pledged his efforts for the promotion of bilateral relations. Palmer also mentioned the contribution of Rewi Alley who is now working for the re-establishment of the Shandan Bailie school in Gansu Province, north-west China, and Palmer announced that the New Zealand government will donate 150,000 New Zealand dollars for this cause.

The two-way trade between New Zealand and China during the 12-month period ending in September 1987 reached a value of 467.8 million New Zealand dollars (285.35 million US dollars), Up from 406.4 million New Zealand dollars in the year-ago period. This was pointed out by chairman of the China Trade Association Dave Oram at the annual meeting of the association in Auckland on November 25, 1987, according to local press reports. The association is made up of 90 major New Zealand companies which trade with China. China has become New Zealand's fifth biggest export market. Oram said New Zealand exported products worth 356.5 million New Zealand dollars (217.46 million US dollars) to China in the 12 months under review, compared with 311.5 million New Zealand dollars (190.01 million u.s. dollars) in the 1985-86 period. New Zealand Prime Minister David Lange said recently that China is the biggest buyer of New Zealand's wool in 1987 and can also become the biggest buyer of its butter, lamb and timber.

The New Zealand deputy Prime Minister Don McKinnon has called for the strengthening of economic exchanges and cooperation between New Zealand and China at a meeting on January 25, 1991. In meeting Guo Zhenqian, visiting Deputy Governor of the People's Bank of China, and the Bank's delegation led by Guo, McKinnon said the New Zealand people are "fascinated" in China, they have been concerning about what are going on in China and for a long time they have wanted to know China better.

China and New Zealand, both Asian-Pacific countries, share common interests in many major fields, especially in the economy and trade, said Qian Qichen, the Chinese State Councilor and Foreign Minister, In Beijing on May 9, 1991. In his meeting with Graham Ansell, secretary of the New Zealand Ministry of External Relations and Trade, Qian said that the potential for developing friendly cooperation between the two countries is great, adding that the prospects for such relations are very bright. Qian stressed that it is in the fundamental interests of both countries to strengthen consultations, expand exchanges and consolidate cooperation. Ansell said he witnessed the great achievements China has made in all the fields during his current visit. The vigorous economic development in recent years left a particular impression on him, he added. He said that New Zealand is drawing up a medium and long-term plan for developing its relationship with China, adding that leading politicians of the country attach importance to developing friendly ties with China. He said that even if changes occur in New Zealand's government, both the political parties in New Zealand will stick to its friendly policy towards China. The Chinese vice-Foreign Minister Liu Huaqiu held talks with Ansell on bilateral relations and international issues of common concern. The two sides reached a mutual understanding. After the talks, Liu and Ansell signed an agreement on establishing a consulate general in each other's countries on behalf of their respective governments. According to the agreement, China will set up a consulate general in Auckland, New Zealand and New Zealand will set up one in Shanghai or Guangzhou. Ansell arrived in China on May 2, 1991 at the invitation of the Chinese Foreign Ministry. Earlier he and his party had visited Shanghai, Suzhou, Hangzhou and Xi'an.

China is expected to become New Zealand's top trading partner early in the next century, officials and economists of the two countries said on November 28, 1997. "China will become New Zealand's biggest market and probably New Zealand's biggest source of imports early in the 21st century," New Zealand economist Frank Holmes told a Sino-New Zealand relationship seminar opened in Beijing. Sino-New Zealand trade has witnessed a dramatic increase over the past few years with New Zealand's exports to China rising from $ 753,000 in 1972, when diplomatic relations were being built, to $ 344.5 million so far this year. Bilateral trade reached $ 630 million last year, up 9.6 per cent from the previous year. Zhu Qizhen, former vice-minister of foreign affairs, said New Zealand has become one of the regions with the greatest Chinese investment overseas. So far, China has 20 investment projects in New Zealand with investments totaling over 5.2 billion Yuan ($ 626 million), largely in forestry. In addition, China is the largest buyer of New Zealand's wool products. Last year, China imported 47,400 tons of wool, worth $ 116 million, from New Zealand, accounting for 40 per cent of its total wool exports. New Zealand has 348 investment projects in China with contracted investment of $ 270 million.

The Chinese and New Zealand leaders said on November 29, 1997, in Beijing they shared the view that bilateral relations have proceeded smoothly since diplomatic ties began 25 years ago. Chinese Premier Li Peng and visiting New Zealand Prime Minister James Brendan Bolger agreed that relations between their countries have maintained a good development momentum in recent years. They said that the frequent mutual visits and contacts between leaders of the two countries play an important role in promoting relations. Bolger flew to Beijing from Vancouver after attending the fifth informal leadership conference of the Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation (Apec) forum there. Li said the Chinese Government attaches importance to relations with New Zealand and is ready to increase co-operation and exchanges with New Zealand further in various fields on the basis of mutual respect, equality and mutual benefit. "We are glad to see that New Zealand's leaders have expressed their emphasis on relations with China and their opposition to the policy of China containment on many occasions since the New Zealand joint government was established one year ago," Li said. The two countries reached agreement in the bilateral market access talks on China's entry into the World Trade Organization (WTO) in August, which makes New Zealand the first country to reach such an agreement with China, Li said. New Zealand has taken a good leading role in this respect, Li said. Bolger said New Zealand is very satisfied with the development of relations with China and actively supports China's early entry into the WTO. He expressed the hope that China can make New Zealand a destination country for Chinese citizens' overseas tourism-a proposal that Li supported. Li briefed Bolger on China's implementation of the policy of "one country, two systems" in Hong Kong, saying that he hopes New Zealand will continue to maintain close economic ties with Hong Kong. He expressed appreciation for New Zealand's support for China's stands on the Taiwan issue at the 28th South Pacific Forum meeting in September. Bolger pledged that New Zealand will, as it has in the past 25 years, stick to its commitment regarding the "one China" policy. Li said that bilateral economic and trade links have achieved remarkable progress, pushed by the good political relations. He urged New Zealand to enhance product quality and competitiveness further and increase investment in fields needed by China. Bolger welcomed China's investment in New Zealand, saying it is an important channel for expanding bilateral exchanges. The two leaders also exchanged views on the financial crisis in Southeast Asia and on the present international situation. After the talks, Bolger attended a reception banquet marking the 25th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between China and New Zealand hosted by the Chinese People's Association for Friendship With Foreign Countries. Bolger also attended the closing ceremony of a seminar marking the 25th anniversary the day before.

On 19 April, 2001, the Chinese Premier Zhu Rongji told visiting New Zealand Prime Minister Helen Clark that he believes that the relationship between China and New Zealand will continuously develop in the new century. At a meeting with Clark, Zhu spoke positively of the steady development of bilateral ties in the past nearly three decades, especially the successful exchange of visits between heads of state of the two countries in recent years during which they agreed to build a long-term and stable bilateral overall cooperative relationship geared to the 21st century. This has laid a firm foundation for the development of bilateral relations in the new century, the premier said. Noting the rapid development in bilateral economic and trade cooperation last year, Zhu said that the two economies are high complementary and have huge potential for cooperation. He welcomed business people from New Zealand to take an active part in the development ofChina's western areas with their advantages in technology, capital, resources and management. Zhu expressed appreciation of New Zealand's position on human rights which stands for dialogue instead of confrontation, and their non-signing in an anti-China motion proposed by the United States at the 57th session of the United Nations Human Rights Commission. Reiterating China's consistent stand on the Taiwan issue, Zhu stressed that it is the most sensitive issue in the China-New Zealand relations and the proper treatment of this issue is key to ensuring the development of the relations. He said China appreciates the New Zealand government's statement to adhere to the one-China policy and hopes the New Zealand side could be fully aware of the significance and sensitivity of the Taiwan issue and abide by the one-China policy and concerned commitments, not allowing Taiwan politicians to visit New Zealand, nor engaging in official contacts with Taiwan in any form nor supporting Taiwan's attempts to join international organizations composed of sovereign states. Zhu went on to say that China and New Zealand have had good cooperation in the process of China's entry into the World Trade Organization (WTO), and the negotiations between the two countries on China's WTO entry have concluded, thus producing one of the earliest bilateral agreements China has signed with foreign countries. China appreciates it. Zhu also briefed Clark and his party on China's policies on issues like Tibet and religions. Talking about the recent mid-air collision incident in which a US military reconnaissance plane rammed and destroyed a Chinese fighter jet, Zhu noted that it is unreasonable for the US to resort to lame arguments, adding that China has exercised restraint on this issue. Taking humanitarianism into consideration, China released the US crew members, however, China still sticks to a firm position against hegemonism, said Zhu. China hopes that Sino-US relations can still move forward, and from a long-term point of view, China is not pessimistic about the prospects of Sino-US relations, Zhu emphasized. Zhu said his talks with Clark are frank, friendly and constructive. Clark said that the year 2002 will be the 30th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic ties between New Zealand and China, which will be an important moment for the two countries. She reiterated her government's principled one-China position, saying that New Zealand will strictly control its relations with Taiwan within the economic and trade field. She also restated New Zealand government's policy to dialogue with China in the field of human rights. She added China's entry into the WTO is very important for the organization itself. Clark promised to attend the APEC informal leadership meeting, scheduled for October in Shanghai. During the talks, the two leaders also exchanged views on some international issues, and issues concerning trade, finance, education and tourism between the two countries.

New Zealand aims to be the first developed country to reach a Free Trade Agreement (FTA) talks with China, New Zealand's Prime Minister Helen Clark said on May 31, 2005. At a business lunch with senior Chinese officials and representatives from business circles, Clark said after three rounds of FTA talks between New Zealand and China, though both sides have sensitive issues to work through, she believed that with leadership, goodwill and commitment, negotiations can succeed. China and New Zealand kicked off FTA talks on December 6, 2004. The third round talks were held from May 18 to May 20 in New Zealand, during which the two sides held discussions on trade, service and investment issues and made positive progress in many areas. It was agreed that the next round of talks would be held in Beijing in July, 2005. A joint feasibility study on a FTA done in New Zealand shows that there would be immediate gains for both countries from a far-reaching and comprehensive agreement which covered goods, services and investment, Clark said. "New Zealand now has extensive economic interests in China," the Prime Minister said, adding that in the past five years the exports of New Zealand to China have increased one hundred per cent. "China is now our fourth largest export market, and our fourth largest trading partner overall with two way trade at over five billion New Zealand dollars," she said. New Zealand has accomplished "three firsts" in its relations with China in recent years: it is the first developed country to conclude a bilateral market access agreement with China for its entry to the World Trade Organization; the first to recognize China's status as a market economy and the first country to enter FTA negotiations with China. "Our leading agri-tech businesses are actively looking for more opportunities in China. Cooperation in agriculture between New Zealand and China will be a win for both sides." Clark said, saying that New Zealand is ready to cooperate with China in various areas, especially agricultural technology and research. More than 200 guests from the Chinese government, the New Zealand embassy in China and business circles were present for the occasion. Clark arrived here Sunday evening on a three-day working visit to China at the invitation of her Chinese counterpart Wen Jiabao.

New Zealand was the first developed country to sign a bilateral agreement with China on its accession to the World Trade Organization. It was the first developed country to recognize China's status as a market economy. And it was the first developed country to launch bilateral negotiations with China on a free trade agreement. When Premier Wen Jiabao visited Wellington in April 2006, he expressed the hope that the talks would conclude positively in a year or two. He added that relations between China and New Zealand can "serve as a model for the harmonious coexistence and reciprocal cooperation between countries with different political systems, different cultural traditions and different historical backgrounds." The two countries are far from equals. As Phil Goff, New Zealand's Minister of Trade, said in an interview in Wellington, China with a population of 1.3 billion is "our fourth largest market" while New Zealand with its 4 million people is "China's 52nd largest trading partner." So what is New Zealand's attraction for China? According to Liu Quan, counselor at the Chinese embassy, Beijing is opening up more and "we are starting to deal with developed countries" and the relationship with New Zealand "is a kind of showcase." New Zealand and China, Liu said, "enjoy excellent relations, especially in recent years." Moreover, China has "a lot to learn from New Zealand." In a sense, New Zealand is China's window onto the developed world. "If they do a deal with us," said Jim Sutton, New Zealand's associate minister for trade negotiations, "it's a good start. It's pretty risk-free for China, gaining experience with dealing with a Western power. We provide China with a foot in the door and they will better understand OECD countries." As for New Zealand, an FTA would be a big boon to its economy since it would mean the elimination, or at least the substantial lowering, of Chinese tariffs. New Zealand removed most of its tariffs more than a decade ago. The initiative for the FTA negotiations came from New Zealand, but China was happy to respond. "The world doesn't beat a path to our door," said Sutton. No doubt, China also appreciates New Zealand's independent foreign-policy stance. Wellington ended its alliance with the United States in the 1980s. New Zealand also did not support the American invasion of Iraq in 2003. China has negotiated FTAs with other countries, but never a comprehensive one with a developed economy. In the opening rounds, the New Zealand side repeatedly emphasized its desire for a "comprehensive" agreement, one that would include not only trade in goods but also services, investment and government procurement. "We found we were getting pushed back on the word comprehensive," Sutton said, so he and his colleagues switched to the term "high quality." However, when Premier Wen visited, he pointedly used the term "comprehensive," signaling China's desire for a genuine FTA, not just one done for window dressing purposes. Still, Goff acknowledges that any agreement might have to be phased. "China," he said, "is not used to negotiating in a comprehensive way." New Zealand, he said, was showing flexibility by seeking "the comprehensive elimination of tariffs on merchandise goods and if possible on services over a number of years." According to Stuart Ferguson, chairman of the New Zealand China Trade Association, Chinese diplomats are keeping the New Zealand business community informed of the progress of negotiations. "I would meet with the Chinese consul general or commercial representative every other week," he said. This is transparency of a kind rarely found in China and much to be applauded. Aside from economic relations, China and New Zealand are also developing their cultural and educational relationships. China is setting up a Confucius Institute at the University of Auckland later this year. A primary purpose is to upgrade the teaching of the Chinese language in New Zealand. Confucius Institutes are a way of projecting Chinese soft power around the world. And Peking University, the most prestigious educational institution in China, is scheduled to establish a New Zealand studies center. One of its first projects will be a translation of New Zealand literature into Chinese. Beijing, it appears, is serious about ensuring that its excellent relations with New Zealand will be long-lasting as well.

PS-SOURCES: Xinhua April 12, 1977, May 17, 1979, September 19, 1980, April 5, 1981, December 20, 1982, November 25, 1987, September 7, 1990, January 25, 1991, May 9, 1991, Agence France Presse May 24, 1991, BBC March 23, 1987, April 20, 2001, China Daily November 28, 1997, November 29, 1997, Asia Pulse May 31, 2005, China Post June 21, 2006

MARITIME-MIDS:

MARITIME-DISPUTE:

Discussion:

SOURCES: Gibler, D.M. 2018. Militarized Interstate Dispute Narratives, 1816-2010. Langham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. 
