FILE: cm710900v11.0.txt
DYAD: CHINA-AUSTRALIA
RIVALRY: RIV1311
DISPUTE(S): MID51 MID1353 MID611 

RIVNOTES: 

PS: 19500101-19721221 0.25 19721222-20209999 0.5

PS-UPDATE2020:

PSNOTES: relationship starts when china becomes a major regional power in 1950.

PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20220324
PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20220324

Territorial-Maritime-Boundary Issues Variables

MID51 

TERRMID: MID51 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID51 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID51 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID51 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID51 from cm002710 narrative, this MID is the Korean War. The US and UN forces fought along with the South Koreans, and China fought along with the North Koreans. North and South Korea were engaged in a territorial dispute in the Korean War, and China's and UN's opposing support led them to fight directly, triggering this MID between them. Coded third party link to territorial MID because the territorial dispute in Korea led these countries to be involved in this multilateral MID. 

MARITMID: MID51 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID51 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: MID51 the Korean War involved the disputation of maritime boundaries between North and South Korea as well, since each side claimed the entirety of each other's territory. Coded not maritime because China and Australia did not dispute a maritime boundary here, although they are linked to the maritime element of the dispute. 

ISLMID: MID51 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID51 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: MID51 the Korean War involved the disputation of islands off the coast of the Korean Peninsula as well, since each side claimed the entirety of each other's territory. Coded not islands because Australia and China were not disputing islands here, but they were linked to the islands element of the Korean dispute here. 

CIVWARMID: MID51 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID51 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID51 1 -- civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID51 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID51 coded civil war link because the Korean War has a civil war element. Like China, Korea was divided along communist vs nationalist lines, and these two groups eventually fought the Korean War. That war is considered a civil war since the primary disputants were Koreans, and the peninsula was not divided into two states until after WWII, when it also becomes a territorial dispute. North and South Korea claim the entirety of each other's territory and see the opposing regime essentially as a militarized group illegitimately controlling part of the peninsula. Coded civil war link because the Korean civil war is outside of this dyad, and the UN forces and China fought here due to their opposing support in that war. 

COUPMID: MID51 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID51 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID51 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID51 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES:

MID1353 

TERRMID: MID1353 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID1353 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID1353 this is connected to the Laotian Civil War, and China and Austrialia's opposing support. That conflict did not have a territorial dispute element; it was purely civil war in nature. See CIVWARLINK.

MARITMID: MID1353 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID1353 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID1353 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID1353 1 -- civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID1353 from cm002710 narrative and Gibler 2018, this is related to the Laotian Civil War that takes place from 1963 to 1973. China directly supported the Pathet Lao communist insurgency and conducted military operations in northern Laos, and the USSR provided less direct support to communist insurgents. The US, UK, Thailand, Australia, and New Zealand supported the Royal Laotian Government (RLG) forces. The opposing support by China and Australia pulls them into this MID against each other. Coded civil war link because this was connected to the Laotian Civil War. 

COUPMID: MID1353 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID1353 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID611

TERRMID: MID611 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID611 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID611 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID611 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID611 from Gibler 2018, this is the Vietnam War, an internationalized civil war that has a territorial dispute element between North and South Vietnam. The US, South Korea, Thailand, Cambodia, Philippines, Australia, and New Zealand supported South Vietnam, and USSR and China supported North Vietnam. Australia and China's opposing support pulls them into this MID against each other. Coded third party link to territorial MID because this was connected to a territorial dispute between North and South Vietnam. 

MARITMID: MID611 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID611 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID611 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID611 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID611 3 -- not civil war
CIVWARMID-CER: MID611 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARLINK: MID611 1 -- civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID611 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID611 coded civil war link because the Vietnam War is an internationalized civil war occurring outside this dyad. 

COUPMID: MID611 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID611 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID611 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID611 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID4278

TERRMID: MID4278 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID4278 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID4278 1 -- third party link to territorial MID
TERRLINK-CER: MID4278 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: MID4278 coded third party link to territorial MID because this was connected to the China-Taiwan dispute, in which each country claims the entirety of the other's territory. 

MARITMID: MID4278 1 -- maritime MID
MARITMID-CER: MID4278 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: MID4278 from Gibler 2018, in 2001 an Australian ship sailed into the Taiwan Strait. A Chinese ship intercepted it and demanded it leave the area. Australia argues that it had the right to be in the waters. The Taiwan Strait is disputed between China and Taiwan. Coded maritime MID because, while Australia does not claim sovereignty over the strait itself, it does dispute China's claim to exclusive sovereignty over the strait's waters. 

ISLMID: MID4278 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4278 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4278 1 -- civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4278 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID4278 This dispute links to the China-Taiwan conflict, which China considers a civil war (i.e., does not recognize Taiwan). Coded civil war because China sits within this dyad.

CIVWARLINK: MID4278 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4278 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: MID4278 This dispute links to the China-Taiwan conflict, which China considers a civil war (i.e., does not recognize Taiwan). Coded civil war link because Taiwan sits outside this dyad.

COUPMID: MID4278 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4278 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4278 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4278 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID3 1993-2001:

MID4278
rivalry=710900 nationa=CHINA nationb=AUSTRALIA MID4278 20010417-20010417 
 revtype1a=POLICY revtype2a=NOT APPLICABLE fatala=NONE fatalpa=0 lhosta=DISPLAY OF FORCE 
 revtype1b=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2b=NOT APPLICABLE fatalb=NONE fatalpb=0 lhostb=
NO MILITARIZED ACTION 

This dispute consists of 1 incident in which 3 Australian naval vessels traversed into a "sensitive" area of the Taiwan Strait and defied an order to leave the area by a Chinese warship. According to reports, the 3 Australian vessels entered the Taiwan Strait as they were returning from a visit to South Korea. In response, a Chinese warship intercepted the vessels. The Australian vessels sailed on after telling the Chinese vessel that it was within their right to do so. China protested the action. First and last day of dispute was on 4/17/2001.

NARRATIVE-CM:

SOURCES-CM:

NARRATIVE-CR:
The MIDs between China and Australia have one thing in common: the ideological differences between the two countries. In the Cold War context Australia was clearly in the pro western, anti communist camp while the PRC was in the communist camp. All of the MIDs are multilateral. Therefore there is not a rivalry in the sense that the two states have targeted and identified one another as a rival state. In other words, the Chinese do not go after Australia individually over a specific issue or contention between the two states or vice versa. Instead the two states back other allied states up in Cold War proxy wars vying for control and influence of the political organization of states in Asia. 

The three MIDs are the Korean War, MID51, intervention in the Laotian Civil War in support of the western alley Thailand in MID1353, and the Vietnam War MID611. 

In the Korean War, MID51 July 1950 until July 1953, Australia played a small but significant role in the UN agencies and within the overall British Commonwealth organization that fought as part of the UN Command (UNC). From the onset of hostilities in Korea Australia committed air, ground and naval units to the UNC. China participated in the Korean War, probably more in response to American military threats as the American dominated UN forces in Korea pushed towards the Korean-Chinese border at the Yalu River in the fall of 1950. Mao's decision to lend direct military support was also a result of Stalin's refusal to provide the participation of Soviet Air Force unites in the conflict. 

MID1353 is another multilateral MID revolving around the Laotian Civil War. Australia is involved from 5/20/1962 until 11/20/1962 while China is involved from 05/3/1962 until July of 1964. Here Australia and New Zealand augment a squadron of British fighter jets that are deployed to Thailand. Thailand is threatened by the communist insurgents in Laos and has a communist insurgent group of its own to deal with at the time. Western powers are determined to keep Thailand in the west leaning camp and thus aid the country with material support. Australia did not experience combat during its deployment to Thailand. China on the other hand is alleged to have directly aided the Pathet Lao in northern Laos during this period. They are alleged to have supported the Pathet Lao with both logistical support and direct military involvement. There is some question as to whether the Chinese actually were involved in the dispute directly. 

MID611 is the Vietnam War. The Australians were long concerned that a communist victory in Vietnam would threaten the democracies throughout Asia. Starting in 1962, Australia began sending troops to South Vietnam. The first sent advisors and eventually established their own combat zone of control near Saigon. Initially, Australia staffed its units with volunteers. After some time the government initiated conscription. This generated anti war sentiment in the country that ultimately led to the withdrawal of all Australian troops from South Vietnam by December of 1971. For its part, China was the first country to recogize the communist insurgent group, National Liberation Front (NLF), in South Vietnam. From 1964 until 1971, China committed 320,000 troops to the Vietnam War in support of North Vietnam and the NLF. 

In sum, the rivalry between China and Australia, I would argue, is not a rivalry. The MIDs that take place between the countries do have a unifying element in the ideological differences, but they clearly take place in the larger global rivalry between east and west, communist and liberal/capitalism. The two countries do not target one another as rival states individually, the way say China and India do or the way China and Taiwan do. Instead the MIDs that take place between the two countries take place in multilateral contexts that are embedded in the larger global ideological rivalry that was the Cold War. 

SOURCES-CR: 
Facts on File, 5/15/1962, 5/25-5/29/1962; Sandler, 1995, 40-43, 71-74; Tucker, 31-32, 70-71; 

PS-NARRATIVE: 

19459999-19490930 0.5

19491001-19721221 RIV1311-0.25

The Peoples' Republic of China was established on October 1, 1949.The MIDs between China and Australia have one thing in common: the ideological differences between the two countries. In the Cold War context Australia was clearly in the pro western, anti communist camp while the PRC was in the communist camp. All of the MIDs are multilateral. Therefore there is not a rivalry in the sense that the two states have targeted and identified one another as a rival state. In other words, the Chinese do not go after Australia individually over a specific issue or contention between the two states or vice versa. Instead the two states back other allied states up in Cold War proxy wars vying for control and influence of the political organization of states in Asia.

The three MIDs are the Korean War, MID51, intervention in the Laotian Civil War in support of the western alley Thailand in MID1353, and the Vietnam War MID611.

In the Korean War, MID51 July 1950 until July 1953, Australia played a small but significant role in the UN agencies and within the overall British Commonwealth organization that fought as part of the UN Command (UNC). From the onset of hostilities in Korea Australia committed air, ground and naval units to the UNC. China participated in the Korean War, probably more in response to American military threats as the American dominated UN forces in Korea pushed towards the Korean-Chinese border at the Yalu River in the fall of 1950. Mao's decision to lend direct military support was also a result of Stalin's refusal to provide the participation of Soviet Air Force unites in the conflict.

MID1353 is another multilateral MID revolving around the Laotian Civil War. Australia is involved from 5/20/1962 until 11/20/1962 while China is involved from 05/3/1962 until July of 1964. Here Australia and New Zealand augment a squadron of British fighter jets that are deployed to Thailand. Thailand is threatened by the communist insurgents in Laos and has a communist insurgent group of its own to deal with at the time. Western powers are determined to keep Thailand in the west leaning camp and thus aid the country with material support. Australia did not experience combat during its deployment to Thailand. China on the other hand is alleged to have directly aided the Pathet Lao in northern Laos during this period. They are alleged to have supported the Pathet Lao with both logistical support and direct military involvement. There is some question as to whether the Chinese actually were involved in the dispute directly. MID611 is the Vietnam War. The Australians were long concerned that a communist victory in Vietnam would threaten the democracies throughout Asia. Starting in 1962, Australia began sending troops to South Vietnam. The first sent advisors and eventually established their own combat zone of control near Saigon. Initially, Australia staffed its units with volunteers. After some time the government initiated conscription. This generated anti war sentiment in the country that ultimately led to the withdrawal of all Australian troops from South Vietnam by December of 1971. For its part, China was the first country to recogize the communist insurgent group, National Liberation Front (NLF), in South Vietnam. From 1964 until 1971, China committed 320,000 troops to the Vietnam War in support of North Vietnam and the NLF.

In sum, the rivalry between China and Australia, I would argue, is not a rivalry. The MIDs that take place between the countries do have a unifying element in the ideological differences, but they clearly take place in the larger global rivalry between east and west, communist and liberal/capitalism. The two countries do not target one another as rival states individually, the way say China and India do or the way China and Taiwan do. Instead the MIDs that take place between the two countries take place in multilateral contexts that are embedded in the larger global ideological rivalry that was the Cold War.

19721222-20159999 0.5

New Zeeland and Australia, on December 22, 1972, announced the establishment of diplomatic relations with Communist China and the end of relations with Nationalist China. The personnel of Nationalist embassies in both countries have been given deadlines for departure. The Australian deadline for the Nationalist Ambassador S.C. Shen was Jan 25, 1973. Australia and Communist China will exchange ambassadors as soon as arrangements were completed. Australia acknowledges the position of Chinese Communist Government that Taiwan is a province of People's Republic of China. Australian Prime Minister Whitlam said, on December 22, 1972, that ties with Peking have 'corrected a serious distortion in Australia's foreign policy'. The accord was concluded in Paris by the Australian Ambassador to France A. Renouf and the Chinese Ambassador Huang Chen.

Chinese Vice-Premier Deng Xiaoping met with Australian Foreign Minister Andrew Peacock and his party at the great hall of the people in Beijing on June 6, 1979. They held a cordial and friendly discussion on international issues of common interest and on the growth of bilateral relations between China and Australia. Vice-Premier Deng said: "China and Australia are situated in the same region of the world and face the same problems. There are problems that worry our two countries and also events that gladden them. China and Australia, to a large extent, share identical viewpoints in handling affairs of the Asian-Pacific region and international issues." The Australian Foreign Minister Peacock said he agreed that Australia and China had many points in common. In view of their geographic proximity, Australia was more interested than other countries in China's four modernizations. Australia was willing to do its share towards China's modernization program, he declared. The Australian ambassador to China C. G. Woodard attended the meeting. Present on the Chinese side were foreign minister Huang Hua, vice-minister of foreign affairs Zhang Wenjin and Chinese ambassador to Australia Lin Ping. Earlier, the Chinese Minister of Foreign Trade Li Qiang had a friendly meeting with Foreign Minister Peacock. Foreign Minister Huang Hua had another round of talks with Foreign Minister Peacock earlier in the day.

During a meeting with Chinese Vice-Premier Li, on September 5, 1980, Prof Geoffrey Blainey, Chairman of the Australia China Council announced an annual fellowship at an Australian university to study Australia-China relations, a one-year language training fellowship, and a media award worth about 2,800 US dollars or a free trip to China for the best Australian reporting on China. The Australia-China Council will also send six journalists to China in September, and an invitation from the All-China Women's Federation to send a woman's delegation has been accepted. The Council has commissioned a survey of the tens of thousands of letters received last year by Radio Australia from listeners in China. The survey would assist the preparation of the radio's information program. Also in Melbourne on 5th May, 1980, Li visited the Government aircraft factory and watched a demonstration flight by the Australian-designed Nomad light aircraft, and visited a farm animal research centre.

The Chinese Vice-Premier and Minister of Foreign Affairs Huang Hua and Australian Foreign Minister A.A. Street held two rounds of talks in Beijing on January 27, 1981. It was learned that they have exchanged views on a wide range of current major international issues in a sincere and friendly atmosphere. They shared almost identical or similar views on many international issues, while different opinions on certain questions. In their talks, the two ministers reviewed with satisfaction with the steady progress of the bilateral relations between China and Australia. An agreement on cultural co-operation between the two governments was signed by Chinese Minister of Culture Huang Zhen and Australian Foreign Minister A.A. Street on behalf of their respective governments. In his speech at the banquet, Mr Street said that all the talks in Peking had further strengthened my conviction that the relations between China and Australia are soundly based, broad and developing well. ''We have sustained a frequent and useful dialogue on political questions and, despite our political and cultural differences, we see many of these questions from similar perspectives. Our delegations co-operate well in international forums dealing with a broad range of questions.''

On June 17, 1981, it was announced that the Australia-China trade advisory group has been set up recently in Australia with the aim of giving high-level private sector advice to the Australian government to develop trade and commercial and industrial cooperation with China. The group was formed on the basis of three bodies in the country concerned with promoting Australia-China trade and economic relations-the trade development council, the Australia-China business cooperation committee and the Australia-China chamber of commerce and industry. At the first meeting of the group held recently in Canberra, Australian deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and Resources J.D. Anthony said, "China has announced a series of major adjustments in its economic policies, designed to bring about stable development in line with a revised set of priorities. Australian needs to study the implications of these adjustments closely and continue working to ensure the development of two-way trade with a long-term perspective." `Two-way trade between Australia and China had grown rapidly, increasing from 288 million Australian dollars in 1976-77 to 1,045 million Australian dollars last year (1979-80)," he said.

Australia and China have decided to increase economic cooperation by coproduction, co-marketing, joint ventures and compensatory trade, according to a protocol on economic cooperation signed by the two countries in Canberra on September 22, 1981. The protocol said that particular attention should be given to agriculture, the construction industry, the forest products industry, light industry, transportation, mining, the power industry and petroleum exploration. The protocol complements the trade agreement signed by China and Australia in Canberra in July 1973. It was signed by Liu Xiwen, Vice-Minister of Foreign Trade and head of the visiting Chinese government trade delegation, and J. D. Anthony, Australian deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and Resources. In a statement issued on September 22, 1981, to mark the occasion, Anthony said, "the main objectives of the protocol are to facilitate the broadening of our commercial ties, to strengthen the framework of our economic and trade relations and to focus attention on opportunities for commercial and industrial cooperation between enterprises of the two countries, in specific areas endorsed by both governments."

The Australian Minister for Trade Negotiations Neal Blewett will lead an Australian delegation to China the following week for bilateral economic and trade talks, an official from the foreign department announced at a news briefing in Canberra on August 30, 1990. Blewett will co-chair the fourth meeting of the Australia-China joint ministerial economic commission in Beijing on September 3 and 4, 1990. He will also meet relevant Chinese ministers and visit areas and projects of economic significance to Australia during his week-long visit, the official said. The Australia-China joint ministerial economic commission was established by the Australian and Chinese governments in 1987 as an annual ministerial-level forum to coordinate their bilateral economic and commercial relationships. In Beijing, Blewett will attend a reciprocal opening ceremony for the Channar iron ore project-a joint venture mine in Western Australia which supplies 40 percent of Australia's iron ore exports to China, according to the official. Blewett will visit Wuhan to open the China-Australia iron and steel training center, and he will also inspect projects of economic and commercial interest in Shanghai, the official said. Commenting on his forthcoming visit to China, Blewett said that Australia remained committed to a long-term cooperative relationship with China. "The visit reaffirms the government's policy of preserving Australia's long-term strategic and commercial interests, encouraging modernization and liberalization within China and keeping open as many channels of access and communication with as many segments of the Chinese society as possible," he added. Blewett will be accompanied by a number of senior officials from trade and economic portfolios, the official announced.

Australia will immediately normalize relations with China and lift sanctions imposed after the 1989 Beijing massacre, Foreign Minister Gareth Evans said on February 26, 1991. In a statement Evans said that the decision followed the second review of restrictions, which were first modified in 1990. The Australian government had maintained that relations with China would not be restored until China had made progress in human relations. In a radio interview last Wednesday Evans said there had been a marginal improvement in human rights in China. In this statement Evans noted that freedom of speech and association continued to be severely repressed. ''There is no sign of a return to the very open climate of political and economic discussion which preceded June 1989,'' Evans said in the statement. ''The restrictions to be lifted apply to considering new proposals to technical cooperation and agricultural research activities with China, considering new applications for concessional financing under Australia's Development Import Finance Facility, and political party visits including exchanges of parliamentary delegations,'' Evans said. ''The Australian government sees diminishing value in constraining our relations with China to a markedly lower level than those of like-minded countries, not to mention our regional partners,'' Evans said. 'Australia recognizes China's important place in the Asia-Pacific region, and we remain committed to a long-term cooperative relationship with that country both bilaterally and as partners in the region. ''Our hope remains, that the Chinese leaders will allow the processes of reform and modernization to continue, and we will take every available opportunity to press that point,'' Evans said. The Australian government downgraded its relationships with Beijing a week after Chinese troops fired on the demonstrators in Tiananmen Square. These included the suspension of high level visits and defense contacts, together with restrictions on some categories of new aid projects. In January 1990 the blanket ban on ministerial visits was eased as part of an international climate that has seen a number of countries, including Japan and the United States, relaxing restrictions imposed on China.

During a meeting with visiting Chinese Vice Premier Zhu Rongji in Canberra, on 12th February, 1992, the Australian Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade Gareth Evans said that the government of Australia will strictly abide by the principle of the communique on the establishment of diplomatic relations between Australia and China, and will resolutely pursue a one-China policy. Evans said that contacts between Australia and Taiwan will be strictly limited to the scope of ''non-official, non-political and purely civilian contacts.'' Evans was pleased with the fact that ''Australian-Sino relations have been restored to the level of all-round development''. He was satisfied with the state of economic cooperation and trade contacts between the two countries, and he appreciated China's efforts to continue reform of its economic structure, including the trade structure. The Foreign Minister reiterated that Australia supports and welcomes China to join the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation conference, and that it supports and is willing to help China restore its status as soon as possible as a signatory to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade [GATT]. Evans also expressed his admiration for the important role played by China at the UN in promoting a political solution to the Cambodian conflict and the development of the situation on the Korean Peninsula towards peace and stability, as well as for the important role it had played in other international issues. Zhu Rongji deeply appreciated the contributions made by Foreign Minister Evans in actively advocating the development of relations with China, in making efforts to develop friendly cooperative relations between Australia and China over the past years, and in leading Australian-Sino relations back to the track of normal development. Zhu Rongji said As two powers in the Asia-Pacific region, China and Australia should make positive contributions to safeguarding the region's peace and stability. China is ready to further develop relations with Australia and to strengthen all-round cooperation with it. Zhu Rongji also said Not only has the exchange of high-level visits been realized between China and Australia, but bilateral trade has yielded good results. Last year the volume of trade between the two countries hit an all-time high. He said he believed that economic and trade cooperation between China and Australia-which was built on the basis of equality, mutual benefit and long-term cooperation-will continue to develop. Vice Premier Zhu Rongji appreciated and thanked the Australian government's support for the restoration of China's status as a signatory to the GATT and its pursuing of a one-China position. Zhu Rongji also met separately four ministers, including the Treasurer, and leaders of opposition parties. Evans expressed concern about China's tariffs on sales of Australian wool, and voiced Australia's distress over the situation in Tibet, and his hope that there could be genuine dialogue between the Dalai Lama and China. He also sought approval for another human rights delegation to visit China in 1992. Zhu reasserted China's claim to sovereignty over Tibet, but said Peking was working on responses to 240 individual human rights cases raised previously by Australia.

China officially protested the visit of Tibet's exiled spiritual leader, the Dalai Lama, and his scheduled meeting next week with Australia's foreign minister, officials said on April 28, 1992. The Foreign Affairs Department spokesman Jim Dollimore confirmed the Dalai Lama's planned meeting with Foreign Affairs Minister Gareth Evans and China's protest, but he downplayed the significance. ''It is not an official visit, but Gareth Evans will see him,'' Dollimore told United Press International. The Dalai Lama started his Australian tour in Perth to begin a national speaking tour and was scheduled to meet next week in Canberra with Evans. The Chinese Embassy in Canberra lodged a strong protest, accusing the dalai lama of engaging in political activity to split China and undermine national unity, Australian officials said. Chinese officials said the Dalai Lama's meeting with Evans was a political action contrary to Canberra's recognition of Tibet as part of China and would damage relations between Canberra and Beijing. ''They (the Chinese) asked for an explanation, and we told them the Australian government regarded the dalai lama as an influential religious leader,'' he said. ''He is also a Nobel Peace Prize winner,'' Dollimore said. ''As such, the Australian government endorses his visit.'' During his 16-day tour the Dalai Lama will visit seven major cities-Perth, Adelaide, Melbourne, Hobart, Canberra, Brisbane and Sydney-before leaving May 19 for New Zealand, organizers said. The Tibetan leader was scheduled to make two major speeches in Canberra-to the National Press Club, sponsored partly by Amnesty International, and to a ticket-only function at the National Convention Center. Organizers said the visit was ''very much private and low profile.'' The Dalai Lama, who lives in northern India, last visited Australia in 1982. Along with his public appearances, the Dalai Lama also will meet Australian religious leaders, prominent jurists and public figures, organizers said.

On February 25, 1997, Beijing was attempting to get bilateral relations with Canberra back on track by way of offering trade concessions and resuming high-level visits. In its front-page story on this day, the Australian Financial Review, Australia's leading business newspaper, reported Beijing is making overtures as a prelude to Prime Minister John Howard's first visit to mainland China, scheduled to take place March 28 to April 2, 1997. According to the daily, Beijing has confirmed that Justice Minister Tao Siju will fly to Australia in April, ending a ban on high-level visits. Trade Minister Wu Yi told Australian officials that mainland China would this week make concessions in negotiations over Australian wool imports-a trade worth A$ 700 million a year for Australia. Australia has repeatedly asked mainland China to reduce its import tariffs on Australian wool. Wu also promised to push ahead with granting the Australia New Zealand Bank a long-awaited license to operate a branch in Beijing.ANZ Bank, which already has a branch in Shanghai, has seen its application to establish a branch in Beijing delayed since last August due to strained relations between Australia and mainland China on a number of fronts. Beijing has frowned upon the visit of an Australian minister to Taipei last year, a trip to Australia by Tibet's spiritual leader the Dalai Lama and the renewal of a military alliance between the US and Australia. Wu promised Philip Flood, secretary of Australia's Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, that she would use her personal influence to push the ANZ application. Flood went to Beijing last week to hold talks with mainland officials over bilateral relations between the two countries. The daily reported new signs of progress in Sino-Australian ties emerged soon after the death of paramount leader Deng Xiaoping. Relations between Beijing and Canberra entered a period of drift during the last days of the Labor Government in early 1996. Ties grew steadily worse after a coalition government took power in March 1996. But Prime Minister Howard tried his best to rebuild bilateral ties when he first met mainland Chinese president Jiang Zemin at the APEC leaders' summit in Manila last November. Senior Australian officials wanted to restore ties with mainland China before the handover of Hong Kong in July this year because the combined mainland China/Hong Kong market will become Australia's second largest market, trailing behind only Japan. Two-way trade between Australia and mainland China in 1996 was an estimated A$ 8 billion, with the mainland enjoying a trade surplus.

Three of China's top ranking army chiefs are expected to take part in Defense Minister Chi Haotian's visit in February 1998 to Australia. Not only will General Chi become the first Chinese Defense Minister to tour Australia when he arrives next week, the official Xinhua news agency has confirmed he will be accompanied by the heads of what are probably the most important of China's seven military regions. The three are Jiang Futang, of the People's Liberation Army's (PLA) Shenyang regional command, Qian Guoliang, from the Jinan region, and Chen Bingde, from the Nanjing command. The Shenyang region covers China's north-eastern border with Russia which has had a history of disputes, Jinan lies opposite the troubled Korean peninsula, while the Nanjing command is closest to what is potentially China's biggest hot spot, Taiwan. While regional commanders have travelled abroad before, it is considered a diplomatic breakthrough for Australia to have three take part in one trip, even if the mission also includes Japan, Fiji and New Zealand. "This reflects the seriousness of the PLA's interest in engaging with Australia at high levels," said one western analyst on Chinese military affairs. "This is a very high level delegation indeed." China has expressed concerns in the past 18 months over the United States' upgraded military links with Japan and Australia. While the government and military officials meeting Australian visitors have downplayed the issue, the state-run media has published commentaries warily suggesting both countries constitute the northern and southern pincers of a US plan to contain China. Australia's unprecedented program of military exchanges with China has come at the same time as those concerns have been raised. Chi's tour-from February 14-19-shapes as the new highlight in that program, which has included visits to China by the Australian Defense Force's chief, General John Baker, and vice-chief, Vice-Admiral Chris Barrie. Three Australian navy ships also visited the north-eastern port of Qingdao late last year, while in December, both countries held the first round of an expanded bilateral defense dialogue in Beijing. Chi will stop in Sydney, Canberra and possibly Townsville, meeting Prime Minister John Howard, Foreign Affairs Minister Alexander Downer, and Defense Minister Ian McLachlan, at whose invitation he is visiting. Xinhua quoted Chinese military sources as saying Chi's visit would "enhance mutual understanding and trust", with discussions to focus on regional security and bilateral defense issues.

On September 6, 1999, it was announced that the six-day visit to Australia by China's President, Jiang Zemin, is an important milestone for Australia. Jiang is the first Chinese head of state to visit Australia. The Australian Government should not use the visit as an opportunity to grovel before the mighty neighbor to the north. It should make it clear China must not attack Taiwan. To do some will invite world condemnation, including Australia's. China should also realistically accept Taiwan's membership of the World Trade Organization. This is an opportunity for the Australian Prime Minister, John Howard, to strike a blow for Australian businesses which want to trade in and with both China and Taiwan. China's expulsion of foreigners dealing with Taiwan is unacceptable.

Chinese President Jiang Zemin called on September 7, 1999, for closer trade ties with Australia to take advantage of the two countries' complementary economies. Speaking at the first official engagement of his four-day state visit, Jiang said he also wants Australia and China to cooperate more closely in international economic forums, such as the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation meeting in New Zealand starting this weekend. ''China and Australia should increase consultation and cooperation in APEC and international financial institutions and make joint efforts for ... the reform of the international financial system,'' Jiang told the Australia-China Trade and Investment Summit. While China can provide Australia with labor intensive products, China has strong demand for such Australian exports as iron ore, aluminum, grain and wool, Jiang said. China is Australia's fifth largest trading partner. In 1998, Australia racked up exports to China worth 3.8 billion Australian dollars (U.S. dollars 2.4 billion), while its imports from China were worth 5.8 billion Australian dollars (U.S. dollars 3.7 billion). Jiang's first official function since arriving in the southern city of Melbourne on Monday night was accompanied by the noisy chants of about 150 demonstrators protesting China's annexation of Tibet. Shouting ''Jiang Zemin go home'' the protesters were kept out of the hotel where Jiang was speaking by about 40 police including several on horseback. Jiang was due to leave Melbourne later Tuesday for the Australian capital Canberra, where he will attend a state dinner. He was to be officially welcomed to Australia by Prime Minister John Howard. In bilateral talks, Australian officials were planning to urge China not to resort to force in its efforts to reunite Taiwan with mainland China. China has recently stepped up military pressure on Taiwan, which it considers a breakaway province that must eventually be reunited with the mainland, by force if necessary. After leaving Australia, Jiang will head to the APEC summit in New Zealand and a face-to-face meeting with U.S. President Bill Clinton.

On 18 October, 2002, a liquefied natural gas (LNG) sales and purchase agreements between China and Australia was signed in Canberra. The agreement, worth 13.75 billion US dollars, was the biggest in Australia's history of business. According to the agreements, the North West Shelf Venture of Australia will sell 3.3m tons of LNG a year for 25 years starting from 2005 to China's Guangdong province. Australian Industry Minister Ian Macfarlane attended the signing ceremony on behalf of Prime Minister John Howard who is in Bali. Macfarlane hailed the event as a clear proof of the mature relationships between Australia and China. The minister announced a 25 million Australian dollars (14 million US dollars) Australia-Gas Technology Partnership Fund to boost the China's energy relationship with Australia. "It demonstrates our desire for a long-term partnership between China and Australia on energy," he said. Zhang Guobao, deputy chairman of the Chinese government's planning committee said the future of cooperation between China an Australia in the energy resources field is bright. The Chinese government has decided to largely expand the energy sector while Australia possesses rich resource of gas, he added.

Trade Minister Mark Vaile was flying to China on April 21, 2004, for a six-day trip to push Australia's credentials in Beijing as a reliable supplier of raw materials needed to fuel the country's industrial boom. Vaile said China is already Australia's third largest trade partner and the two countries have highly complementary economies. "I will be meeting with key economic decision-makers to assist Australian companies in developing and furthering their links into the Chinese market and will take this opportunity to reaffirm Australia as a stable, reliable supplier of high-quality raw materials," Vaile said in a statement. He cited a 25 billion AUD liquefied natural gas supply contract signed last year and a 9 billion AUD iron ore contract finalized in March 2004, as examples of how the two economies mesh. Vaile will first visit Hong Kong, before moving on to Guangzhou, Shanghai and Hainan Island for the Boao Forum for Asia-Asia's answer to Europe's annual economic forum in Davos, Switzerland. The trip ends in Beijing, where Vaile and China's Commerce Minister Bo Xilai will discuss the possibility of a free trade pact. Australia and China agreed to examine prospects for a free trade deal during President Hu Jintao's visit to Canberra in October 2003, when they commissioned a two-year study into the issue. Recent comments from Canberra have indicated the study is progressing faster than expected and full talks on a free trade agreement could begin before October 2005. Trade experts say China may want to negotiate a free trade deal with Australia as a "practice run" before pursuing similar arrangements with larger industrialized nations.

Australia is increasingly optimistic about securing a free trade deal with China, which it believes could be even more important than the recently signed pact with the United States, the government said on November 1, 2004. With Prime Minister John Howard's government moving for closer economic engagement with Asia as part of its fourth term agenda, it is forecasting for the first time a successful outcome to negotiations for a free trade agreement (FTA) with Beijing. A spokesman for Trade Minister Mark Vaile told Agence France-Presse that the minister was confident that an FTA would be achieved with China, without elaborating. Vaile told The Australian newspaper in an interview confirmed by his spokesman: "We can't afford not to enhance our relationship with China at this point in our history." "It would open up new markets and give us a prominent position in a market growing at about 10 pct a year." Vaile said negotiating an FTA with China would be "arguably more important" than the Australia-US free trade deal recently concluded and due to be implemented on January 1, 2005. China is already Australia's third largest trading partner, after the United States and Japan. With a booming economy, China is an increasingly important consumer of Australia's natural resources, including gas and minerals. Vaile has said he believes an FTA would bring huge new opportunities for Australia to resource China's continuing industrialization after it finalized in 2003 a 25 billion AUD contract to supply China with liquefied natural gas.

Continuing a recent effort to advance Australia's influence in Asia, Australia's Prime Minister, John Howard, is virtually certain to announce that Australia will grant China "market economy status" and open talks on a free-trade pact between the two countries when he visits China on April 16, 2005, according to Australian trade experts and political analysts. Forging a free-trade agreement between Australia and China will be complex, and granting China market status will not dramatically alter China's trade flows to Australia, analysts said. Rather, Howard's anticipated announcement is symbolically significant as part of Australia's campaign to ensure that it has a place at the table as Asian countries cluster around a rising China, competing for markets and diplomatic influence. It will come just weeks after Malaysia's Prime Minister, Abdullah Ahmad Badawi, visited Canberra and announced with Howard the start of talks about a free-trade agreement between their countries. Howard will arrive in Beijing and later fly to Tokyo for talks with Japan's Prime Minister, Junichiro Koizumi. And he will be seeking to assure Tokyo and Washington that Australia's closer ties with China will not weaken its traditional security commitments to Japan and the U.S., analysts said. Australia has endorsed Japan's bid to join the permanent members of the UN Security Council, and on Sunday, just before he leaves for Beijing, Howard will see off Australian soldiers flying to southern Iraq to work alongside Japanese forces there. Nonetheless, China hopes that Australia's greater dependence on the Chinese market will eventually weaken Australia's links with China's potential rivals, said Alan Dupont, an expert on East Asia at the Lowy Institute for International Policy in Sydney. "China is deliberately trying to detach Australia from the U.S.," he said, "not in a formal sense, but in order to make it more difficult for Australia to align with the U.S. in the region." The free-trade agreement between Australia and China, Dupont added, "would be very significant politically, almost as much as economically. It would show relations with China are moving into a new phase." Market economy status is coveted by China as an international mark of its economic maturation and because it makes it more difficult for foreign companies to apply for protective measures against Chinese exports, said a Chinese trade official. He spoke on condition of anonymity, citing the absence of a formal announcement about the deal. "If we get this, it will be a big step forward on several fronts, because Australia is both a major trade partner and a Western country," he said. In 2004 Australia's exports to China grew by 21 percent to 12 billion Australian dollars, or $10 billion, driven largely by mineral exports, and Australia imports from China rose by 26 percent to 18 billion dollars. But the current conflict between China and Japan both of whom Australia claims as close friends and crucial trading partners highlights the delicate balance Howard faces as he reaches for closer ties with China while reassuring Australia's traditional Western allies, especially the United States and Japan, analysts said. "China in just a very few years has supplanted the U.S. as our second biggest export market," said John Edwards, the chief Australia economist of the HSBC bank in Sydney and a former senior government economic adviser. "Now, without offending anyone, Australia wants to make it plain that in respect to China it wants to have a relationship independent of the U.S." The proposed agreement with China is part of this strategy of using trade to secure Australia's influence in the region, analysts said. "There's been a very substantial turnaround in Australia's attitude towards Asia, in both politics and business," said Dupont, noting that Howard's earlier years as prime minister were marked by tense relations with Indonesia and Malaysia, as well as friction with China over Taiwan. Australian and Chinese officials refused to confirm or deny that Howard would announce China's market status and a start to formal negotiations for a free-trade agreement. Howard is to meet China's president, Hu Jintao, and Prime Minister Wen Jiabao. The previous week Australia's trade minister, Mark Vaile, said, "The time is right for Australia to move into free-trade negotiations with China," according to the Web site of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. China has made clear that negotiations must start with Australia granting China "market economy" status.

PS-SOURCES: BBC September 5, 1980, January 27, 1981, February 14, 1992, October 18, 2002, Xinhua February 28, 1977, June 7, 1979, June 18, 1981, September 23, 1981, August 30, 1990, New York Times December 23, 1972, November 9, 1973, United Press International February 26, 1991, April 28, 1992, ASIA PULSE February 4, 1998, Central News Agency February 25, 1997, Australian Financial Review September 6, 1999, Associated Press September 7, 1999, AFX-Asia April 21, 2004, November 1, 2004, International Herald Tribune April 16, 2005

MARITIME-MIDS:

MARITIME-DISPUTE:

Discussion:

SOURCES: Gibler, D.M. 2018. Militarized Interstate Dispute Narratives, 1816-2010. Langham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. 
