FILE: cm710812v11.0.txt
DYAD: CHINA-LAOS
RIVALRY: RIV1305
DISPUTE(S): MID1363 MID1353 MID3026

RIVNOTES: 

PS: 19531023-19861224 0.25 19861225-19871129 -9 19871130-20209999 0.5

PS-UPDATE2020:

PSNOTES: 

PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20220324
PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20220324

MID1363

TERRMID: MID1363 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID1363 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID1363 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID1363 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID1363 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID1363 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID1363 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID1363 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID1363 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID1363 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID1363 from Gibler 2018, this is the Laotian Civil War, an internationalized civil war that involves China, Russia, and North Vietnam supporting the communist rebels in Laos, and US and Thailand supporting the Royalist forces led by Prince Sihanouk. The opposing support by third party countries in this dyad pulls them all into this MID against each other. China is pulled into this MID against Laos due to their support for the communist rebels. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to the civil war in Laos. 

CIVWARLINK: MID1363 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID1363 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID1363 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID1363 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID1363 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID1363 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID1353 

TERRMID: MID1353 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID1353 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID1353 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID1353 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID1353 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID1353 from cm002710 narrative and Gibler 2018, this is related to the Laotian Civil War that takes place from 1963 to 1973. China directly supported the Pathet Lao communist insurgency and conducted military operations in northern Laos. The USSR provided less direct support to communist insurgents. The US, UK, Thailand, Australia, and New Zealand supported the Royal Laotian Government (RLG) forces. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to the Laotian Civil War. 

CIVWARLINK: MID1353 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID1353 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID1353 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID1353 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID3026

TERRMID: MID3026 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID3026 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID3026 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID3026 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID3026 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID3026 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID3026 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID3026 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID3026 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID3026 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID3026 from Gibler 2018, in 1979 Laos accused China of supporting militarized rebels within its borders and of violating its borders. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to militarized rebels in Laos. 

CIVWARLINK: MID3026 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID3026 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID3026 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID3026 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID3026 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID3026 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

NARRATIVE-CM:
Laos demanded that China withdraw its troops from the Chinese-Laotian border region on March 6, 1979. Chinese troops occupied several villages in northern Laos beginning on March 7, 1979, and Laos demanded the withdrawal of Chinese troops from Laotian territory on March 15, 1979. Foreign Minister Khamphai Boupha of Laos referred the matter to *United Nations *(UN) Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim on April 26, 1979. Chinese troops and Laotian troops clashed near the border on December 10, 1979, resulting in the deaths of two Laotian soldiers.

SOURCES-CM: 
*Keesing*, December 4, 1981.

NARRATIVE-CR:
All three of the MIDs do take place in and are best understood in the context of the Cold War. The first two MIDs are about China's support for the Pathet Lao, or Laotian Communist insurgent groups fighting in the Laotian Civil Wars. The third MID has been described variously depending on the source however none of the sources point to a coherence with the first two MIDs. 

In 1961, there was an ongoing internationalized civil war within Laos in which the Communist forces in northern Laos were supported by North Vietnam, USSR, and the Peoples Republic of China. The Royal Laotian Government (RLG) was supported by the USA and Thailand. There was considerable direct support from both the USA and the USSR. The USSR was airlifting supplies to the Pathet Lao while the USA was flying reconnaissance missions in support of the RLG. Neither the USA nor the USSR wanted the conflict to break out into a direct conflict between them. There was a push to resolve the conflict with a conference in Geneva. While preliminary discussion about having the conference in Geneva were ongoing, the Kennedy administration discussed intervention by SEATO. China warned Washington and Laos that should SEATO intervene it would intervene with direct military force. This threat constitutes MID1363.

MID1353 takes place during the second Laotian Civil War that occurs from 1963 until 1975. China is involved in direct support of the Pathet Lao from May of 1962 until July of 1964. China provided direct aid to the communist forces in Laos and conducted direct military operations in Northern Laos. Much of the activity China was involved in centered on completing a road network in Northern Laos that would connect North Vietnam, Laos and Thailand. The road network would provide access of supplies and troops for the communist groups in all three countries. Chinese forces were also involved in direct military confrontation with the Royal Laotian Government. 

MID3026 takes place within the context of the Sino Soviet rift. From March until May 1975 North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao launched an offensive and gained control of Laos. Subsequently Laos tried to chart a course between the PRC and USSR without alienating either great power. Laos signed a 25-year treaty of Friendship and cooperation with Vietnam. Vietnam was a traditional rival of China and had close ties to the USSR. 

The actual details of MID3026 have been reported in two ways. From January through March of 1979 China launched a military offensive into Vietnam. During the withdrawal of PRC troops in March 1979 the Laotian government reported that PRC troops crossed into its territory and that a large invasion force was massed at the Laos border. Laos further reported that the PRC sent spies into Laos to create divisions among the Lao people. Laos also complained that the PRC had defied a Laotian request to withdraw 3,000 PRC construction workers and to terminate a road building agreement with Peking. 

US sources interpret this event differently. US sources argue that the reports of PRC invasion of Laos originated in Moscow were transmitted to Hanoi and then reported by Vientiane. US sources argue that this suggests Moscow was the source of the information. US sources report that no western intelligence indicated that PRC forces had or were preparing to invade Laos. US sources describe the report of PRC forces invading Laos as either a ploy to distract attention away from PRC troop withdrawal from Vietnam or a ploy to get Laos to ally itself more closely with the USSR instead of the PRC. 

Therefore, there are two explanations as to the events of March 1979. Either PRC forces invaded Laos and were massed at the border to create divisions in the Lao people or reports of these events were generated to carry out an internal communist political maneuvering. In either event the third MID, MID3026 does not hang together with the first two MIDs between China and Laos. 

SOURCES-CR: 
Bercovitch and Jackson, 1997, 93, 120, 188; Butterworth, 1976, 240-245, 345-348; Dommen, 1971, 274-5; Facts on File, 3/23/1979; New York Times, 4/1/1961, 5/5/1962,3/15/1979, 3/16/1979; Stuart-Fox, 1997;

PS-NARRATIVE: 

19531023-19861224 RIV1305-0.25

Laos entered the international system on October 23, 1953. Communist China provided support to Laotian communist guerillas in exile against the Laotian government throughout the 1950s. On May 14, 1959, Communist China accused Laos of harboring Nationalist Chinese guerilla troops. On July 28, 1959, Communist China said that all countries should check against the dangerous activities of the Laotian Government.

The three MIDs between China and Laos do not constitute a rivalry. All three of the MIDs do take place in and are best understood in the context of the Cold War. The first two MIDs are about China's support for the Pathet Lao, or Laotian Communist insurgent groups fighting in the Laotian Civil Wars. The third MID has been described variously depending on the source however none of the sources point to a link with the first two MIDs.

In 1961, there was an ongoing internationalized civil war within Laos in which the Communist forces in northern Laos were supported by North Vietnam, USSR, and the Peoples Republic of China. The Royal Laotian Government (RLG) was supported by the USA and Thailand. There was considerable direct support from both the USA and the USSR. The USSR was airlifting supplies to the Pathet Lao while the USA was flying reconnaissance missions in support of the RLG. Neither the USA nor the USSR wanted the conflict to break out into a direct conflict between them. There was a push to resolve the conflict with a conference in Geneva. While preliminary discussion about having the conference in Geneva were ongoing, the Kennedy administration discussed intervention by SEATO. China warned Washington and Laos that should SEATO intervene it would intervene with direct military force. This threat constitutes MID1363.

MID1353 takes place during the second Laotian Civil War that occurs from 1963 until 1975. China is involved in direct support of the Pathet Lao from May of 1962 until July of 1964. China provided direct aid to the communist forces in Laos and conducted direct military operations in Northern Laos. Much of the activity China was involved in centered on completing a road network in Northern Laos that would connect North Vietnam, Laos and Thailand. The road network would provide access of supplies and troops for the communist groups in all three countries. Chinese forces were also involved in direct military confrontation with the Royal Laotian Government.

MID3026 takes place within the context of the Sino Soviet rift. From March until May 1975 North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao launched an offensive and gained control of Laos. Subsequently Laos tried to chart a course between the PRC and USSR without alienating either great power. Laos signed a 25-year treaty of Friendship and cooperation with Vietnam. Vietnam was a traditional rival of China and had close ties to the USSR.

The actual details of MID3026 have been reported in two ways. From January through March of 1979 China launched a military offensive into Vietnam. During the withdrawal of PRC troops in March 1979 the Laotian government reported that PRC troops crossed into its territory and that a large invasion force was massed at the Laos border. Laos further reported that the PRC sent spies into Laos to create divisions among the Lao people. Laos also complained that the PRC had defied a Laotian request to withdraw 3,000 PRC construction workers and to terminate a road building agreement with Peking.

US sources interpret this event differently. US sources argue that the reports of PRC invasion of Laos originated in Moscow were transmitted to Hanoi and then reported by Vientiane. US sources argue that this suggests Moscow was the source of the information. US sources report that no western intelligence indicated that PRC forces had or were preparing to invade Laos. US sources describe the report of PRC forces invading Laos as either a ploy to distract attention away from PRC troop withdrawal from Vietnam or a ploy to get Laos to ally itself more closely with the USSR instead of the PRC.

Therefore, there are two explanations as to the events of March 1979. Either PRC forces invaded Laos and were massed at the border to create divisions in the Lao people or reports of these events were generated to carry out an internal communist political maneuvering. In either event the third MID, MID3026 does not hang together with the first two MIDs between China and Laos.

On 6th March 1979, the LPDR Government issued a statement saying that the Chinese rulers had moved many divisions of troops to areas bordering Laos, carried out military exercises, smuggled in spies and agents to spread propaganda with the aim of sowing division among the Lao people of all nationalities, and continuously supported and coordinated with the imperialists and reactionaries in sabotaging the security and public order of the Lao people and opposing the LPDR Government's policies and line. The statement also demanded that the Chinese side stop all acts of interference in the internal affairs of the LPDR, halt all acts of armed threat against the LPDR and respect the LPDR's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity. On 7th March 1979, the acting Foreign Minister of the LPDR sent an official Note to the PRC Foreign Minister requesting that the Chinese Government temporarily halt the construction of roads in Northern Laos and send home all the Chinese construction team as soon as possible since these Chinese workers had actually stopped constructing the roads. Moreover, they had dug trenches in preparation for combat, thus causing a tense situation in the area. The LPDR foreign ministry also took the occasion to request that the Chinese technicians carrying out duties in some offices and organizations in Laos be returned to China, since the date stipulated in the agreement signed by the Lao and Chinese sides had expired. In the face of the antagonistic attitude towards Laos, we have exercised great restraint in an attempt to safeguard the friendship between the Lao and Chinese peoples and, at the same time, to defend the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Laos. The Chinese side was accused of adopting an unfriendly attitude, continued to interfere in the internal affairs of Laos and ever more seriously threatened Laos. For example, China is continuing to send an increasing number of troops to areas bordering Laos. It has daily increased the number of all military corps-including tanks, armored cars, artillery pieces, infantry troops and cavalrymen, in areas bordering Laos' Luang Namtha, Oudomsai and Phong Saly Provinces. Meanwhile, it has gathered thousands of Vang Pao and Kong Le exiled reactionaries and other reactionaries in areas near the Lao border. On 7th March 1979, China sent two battalions of troops to encroach on Lao territory as far as Ban Boteng in Luang Namtha Province, which is 2 km from the border. On 10th March Chinese troops nibbled at Lao territory in Ban Muang Nan in Luang Namtha Province, between 2 and 3 km deep and on a 10 km front inside Laos. Moreover, China arrested two Lao cadres who had contacted local Chinese officials to demand that China withdraw its troops from Laos. The Chinese rulers declared that they had been supporting and assisting the patriotic Lao people, who are in fact the Lao reactionary forces who served as imperialist stooges in opposing the Lao patriotic revolutionary movement and the LPDR Government. This was clearly reported by the "Voice of America", BBC and AFP. These actions and words show the Chinese rulers' intentions of violating the sovereignty of Laos and reveal China's antagonistic behavior towards the Lao people and its inhuman designs to overthrow the LPDR. These actions by the Chinese rulers constitute a brazen insult to Laos and an arrogant challenge to the forces of peace, national independence, democracy and socialism. The LPDR Foreign Ministry condemns the Chinese rulers' reactionary activities that threaten Laos and resolutely and completely denies the various Chinese rulers' distortions of facts and slanderous charges against the LPDR. 

The Chinese permanent representative to the United Nations, Chen Chu, sent a letter on March 26, 1979, to the United Nations Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim, further elaborating the true state of affairs of the relations between China and Laos and repudiating the Lao authorities' attacks and slanders against China. The Chinese permanent representative requested the U.N. Secretary-General to arrange for the circulation of his letter as an official document of the United Nations. The letter reads: "Recently, the Lao authorities have been viciously attacking and slandering China by spreading a series of lies about China massing troops along the Sino-Lao border, engaging in combat exercises. 'threatening' Laos, 'invading' Lao territories, and so on and so forth. At the same time, the Lao authorities have organized large-scale anti-China rallies on a number of occasions and unilaterally torn up agreements by asking China to halt its aid projects in Laos and withdraw Chinese technicians and experts in a deliberate attempt to worsen the relations between the two countries. In connection with the above actions taken by the Lao authorities, the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs has already made clear the position of the Chinese government in its memorandum dated March 10, 1979, addressed to the Lao Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Now, the Chinese side deems it necessary to further elaborate on the true state of affairs, so as to set the record straight. "China and Laos are friendly neighbors, and the boundary between China and Laos has always been one of friendship. Over a long period, the border inhabitants of the two countries have helped and supported each other. There has never been any dispute or quarrel along the border. China has not a single soldier in Laos. The Chinese government and people have always supported the Lao people in their struggle against imperialism and for national independence and liberation, and have rendered assistance to the reconstruction in Laos to the best of their capabilities. Since last year, with the entry of Vietnamese troops into Laos, the Lao authorities have taken a number of actions detrimental to the friendly relations between the two countries. Showing understanding for the difficult plight in which the Lao authorities have found themselves, the Chinese government has exercised restraint all along. However, of late, the Lao authorities have suddenly escalated their anti-china activities, openly hurled venomous charges against China and even baselessly accused China of 'preparing to launch an armed invasion' against Laos.

In its note of 1st June, 1979, to the PRC Embassy in Laos, the LPDR Ministry of Foreign Affairs asked the embassy to "reduce its staff to 12 people not later than the end of June", giving as its reason the present state of relations between the two countries and in view of the size of the Lao embassy staff in China, and made the unjustifiable request that the "military attache and all other kinds of military cadres not to be included" among the 12 people. The Chinese Government deeply deplores this new measure by the Lao authorities to exacerbate Sino-Laotian relations. Since the establishment of diplomatic relations in 1961, the Chinese and Lao Governments have always sent embassy staffs to serve in the other country in accordance with their respective needs. In July 1978, the Lao authorities demanded the closure of the office of the representative of the economic counsellor of the Chinese Embassy in Muong Sai. Subsequently, Laos again unilaterally announced the cessation of the M Nam Bak-Luang Prabang highway project which China had undertaken to help build, and ordered the withdrawal within a specified time of Chinese technical personnel engaged in the highway project and other Chinese experts working on contract in Laos. Moreover, they shut down the Vientiane office of the NCNA and expelled Chinese correspondents. All this brought to an end economic and technical co-operation between China and Laos and seriously impaired the friendship between the two peoples. Now, the Lao authorities have taken the further unreasonable step of limiting the size of the Chinese embassy staff, demanding the closure of the embassy military attache's office and arbitrarily requesting that members of the embassy staff leave the country within a specified period of time. These are all discriminatory measures and represent a new grave step by the Laotian authorities to deliberately impair relations between China and Laos. 

On August 6, 1982, Laotian radio sources close to the government accused China of harboring Laotian rebels and training them in the Yunnan Province for a possible invasion of Laos. 

The abrupt growth of tension in South-East Asia caused by Vietnam's massive invasion of Kampuchea and its repeated provocations along the Chinese border have aroused the attention of people around the world. In order to divert world attention, the Soviet and Vietnamese governments have spread rumors in an attempt to blame China for the tension in South-East Asia which they created. They also have tried to sow dissension between China and Laos and justify their further attempt to control Laos. China believes that the menace to Laos' independence and security does not come from China, but from Vietnam and the USSR. Instigated and supported by the USSR, Vietnam has always nurtured the scheme to set up an "Indochina federation" in an attempt to annex Laos and Kampuchea and then expand over South-East Asia in order to serve the interests of the Soviet global strategy of world hegemony. In order to fulfill its regional hegemonic goal, Vietnam has in recent years stepped up its political control and military occupation of Laos in the name of "aid". The Vietnamese authorities signed a treaty of so-called "friendship and co-operation" with Laos and forged a "special relationship," thereby turning Laos into their vassal. The Vietnamese authorities have dispatched over 50,000 Vietnamese regular troops-almost twice as many as the Lao troops-and stationed them at various strategic points in a military occupation of Laos.

19861225-19871129 Transition

The Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister Liu Shuqing said in Bangkok on December 25, 1986 that his five-day visit to Laos has enhanced the understanding between China and Laos. Liu made the remarks to the press upon his arrival from Vientiane for a five-day official visit to Thailand. When asked what he had discussed with Lao officials, Liu said the two sides exchanged views on ways and means to improve bilateral relations and they all expressed desire to better the strained relations. He said the Chinese side has proposed that relations at the ambassadorial level be resumed and the Lao side would consider the proposal. Such a reestablishment of ambassadorial relations will only occur in 1988. Liu also disclosed that he had invited the Lao first Deputy Foreign Minister to visit China and the Lao side accepted the invitation in principle. The Chinese minister said he had made it clear to the Lao side that there does not exist such a question that China supports anti-government forces of Laos. As for why China backs the coalition government of Democratic Kampuchea (CGDK), Liu told the Lao officials that China supports CGDK because Kampuchea is invaded by Vietnam. China always stands on the side of the victim of aggression, he said.

On 24th November, 1987, a delegation from the Laotian Foreign Ministry led by First Deputy Foreign Minister Khamphai Boupha paid a visit to the People's Republic of China and returned home on 30th November, 1987. This marks a new step in the normalization of relations between Laos and China. However, the Lao people do not want to hear only sweet words. They want to see the Chinese side's sincerity proved with actual deeds. This is because until recently a number of people who claimed to have support from China were still engaging in activities against Laos. For example, the Lao exiles from China also attended a meeting organized by the exiled Lao reactionaries in Thailand early this year during which they made plans against the LPDR government. In addition, the Lao reactionaries from refugee camps in China who have infiltrated into the northern provinces of Laos have not yet completely halted their activities. If the assurances given by the Chinese side that they will cancel all their support in all forms for the exiled Lao reactionaries against the LPDR government is clearly proved with actual deeds, it will not only be a significant step in the normalization of Lao-Sino relations but will also contribute to the improvement of the situation in this part of the world.

19871130-20159999 0.5

An official of the Laotian Ministry of Foreign Affairs declared on 30th November, 1987, that China and Laos have reached an accord on restoring friendly relations between the two countries and agreed to resume the exchange of ambassadors. The actual resumption of diplomatic relations occurred only on May 24, 1988, when Laos appointed a new ambassador to China, the first one in more than a decade. The official said that a delegation of the Lao Ministry of Foreign Affairs headed by Khamphai Boupha, First Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the LPDR, visited China from 24th to 30th November, 1987, and Chinese Vice-Foreign Affairs Minister Liu Shuqing had talks with him on the normalization of bilateral relations in a conciliatory, frank and friendly atmosphere. The two sides reached accord on restoring Sino-Lao friendly relations on the basis of the five principles for peaceful coexistence. Both sides agreed to resume the exchange of ambassadors and had talks on issues concerning bilateral trade, including border trade and contacts between border inhabitants of the two countries. Khamphai Boupha invited the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs to send a delegation to visit Laos again and the Chinese side accepted the invitation with thanks. Wu Xueqian, State Councilor and Minister of Foreign Affairs, had a meeting with Khamphai Boupha and his party, and held friendly talks with the guests. Both sides were happy and satisfied with the success of the visit. Wu Xueqian expressed the belief that, through the joint efforts of China and Laos, the friendly relations between the two countries and the traditional friendship between the two peoples will be restored and developed further. In addition to Peking, Khamphai Boupha and his party also visited Canton and Shenzhen. 

The Chinese vice-premier Yao Yilin said he expressed "heartfelt gladness over the restoration of economic and trade relations between China and Laos" when he met Phao Bounnaphol, Minister of Economy and Trade of Laos, at the Great Hall of the People in Beijing on December 21, 1988. Yao said, "the important thing is not the volume of trade but the restoration of bilateral economic and trade ties after a period of suspension". He expressed conviction that such relations will expand in future.

Laos and China signed a memorandum on goods exchange in Vientiane on May 31, 1989, official Laotian news agency KPL reported. According to the memorandum, China will import timber, rattan, agricultural forestry products and medicinal herbs from Laos. Laos is to import from China agricultural machines, textile products and hydro-electric machinery. China also is interested in investing in Laos. The memorandum was signed by Sisuoun Thone, head of the Lao Ministry of Trade and Foreign Economic Relations, and Wu Ming Gwang, deputy head of the foreign economic relations service of China's Guangdong province.

A senior Communist Party of China (CPC) official on August 15, 1989, expressed happiness over the agreement reached by the CPC and the Lao People's Revolutionary Party (LPRP) on the restoration of their relations that occurred in May 1988. Wu Xueqian, a member of the political bureau of the CPC Central Committee, extended his congratulations as he met with Thongsavath Khaykham Puithone, Laos's first vice-foreign minister and first deputy minister of liaison of the LPRP central committee, who is here on a week-long friendly visit. Kaysone Phomvihane, general secretary of the LPRP Central Committee and Chairman of the Lao Council of Ministers, will soon pay an official goodwill visit to China as guest of Chinese premier Li Peng, according to Wu, who is also a vice-premier. "That will be a major event in Sino-Lao relations," he said.

The Chinese Premier Li Peng held talks in Beijing on 6th October, 1989, with Kaysone Phomvihan, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Lao PDR and General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Lao PRP. The two sides agreed that the visit of Kaysone is of great significance to resuming and developing Sino-Lao relations. The relations between China and Laos had always been good, Li Peng said. However, he added, because of historic reasons, bilateral relations were once frigid. Li expressed the belief that the current visit of Kaysone will be a turning point in resuming and developing relations between China and Laos, and between the CCP and the LPRP. Kaysone expressed his happiness about coming to China again after 10 years, saying, ''I believe that my visit will contribute to an overall resumption of the relations between the two parties, the two countries and their peoples, and to the promotion of mutual understanding and bilateral co-operation.'' During the three hour talk in the Great Hall of the People, Kaysone briefed Li Peng on his country's reforms and progress. Kaysone said that since 1985, a reform policy has been implemented in every area of his country. The purpose of the reform is to consolidate, develop and improve the people's democratic system, so that the country may gradually change to socialism. Kaysone briefed Li Peng on Laos's new economic policy including the development of various sectors of the economy and attaching importance to the role of state-run enterprises. He also told Li Peng about measures the Laotian government has taken to fight bureaucracy and bourgeois liberalization. He said that his country feels happy about China's achievements in its 10-year reform and about the fact that China took correct, resolute, and timely measures to put down the counter-revolutionary rebellion which tried to with the collaboration of foreign forces overthrow the CCP. He said that his country is happy to see that after quelling the rebellion, China has adhered to the four cardinal principles, has resolutely opposed bourgeois liberalization and has attached importance to party building. He expressed ''sincere thanks'' to the CCP and the Chinese government for the ''tremendous help'' they gave to the LPRP and to the Laotian people in their fight for liberation and reconstruction. He said that he is satisfied with recent improvement of bilateral relations, adding that ''resuming and developing bilateral relations are very important to Laos''. ''My current visit will help further bilateral relations and contribute to peace in the Asia-Pacific region,'' he said. He also briefed Li on his country's views on the international situation and on Laos's foreign policy.

Officials from China and Laos have signed a border treaty, ending a dispute that has lasted more than a decade, an official report said on September 13, 1991. The treaty was concluded three months after Chinese-Laotian mapping units finished a joint survey of the border area. Laos adjoins China's Yunnan province in a heavily forested area with little development on either side. China's state-run Xinhua News Agency said Lao Vice Foreign Minister Soulivong Phrasithideth and Chinese Vice Foreign Minister Liu Huaqiu initialed the treaty and a map. They agreed to submit the documents for formal signing as soon as possible. Chinese-Lao relations have warmed considerably in the past two years following more than a decade of hostility. Laos sided with Vietnam in its confrontation with China beginning in the late 1970s, and Lao-Chinese ties began to improve only when Vietnamese-Chinese relations improved. Chinese Premier Li Peng visited Laos last year and agreed to loan Laos $ 10 million for economic development.

The heads of the Joint Border Committees of Laos and China, respectively Mr Chaleun Valinthalasak, acting head of the Foreign Ministry's Department No 1, and Mr. Li Wen-ye, ambassador attached to the Chinese Foreign Ministry, signed in Vientiane on 24th January, 1992, a resolution adopted at a preliminary meeting of the border committees of the two sides in Vientiane between 21st and 24th January, 1992. The meeting adopted a plan of action for common border line delimitation, survey and laying of border-marking posts along the two countries' common border over 500 km. long. This will be carried out soon. Lao Deputy Foreign Minister Soulivong Phasitthidet and Chinese ambassador to Laos Huang Guocai witnessed the signing of the agreement. The preliminary meeting of the Joint Border Committees was held within the framework of a border treaty between Laos and China signed on 24th October 1991 in Beijing [Peking] by the prime ministers of the two countries and in response to the immediate desire of the two governments and people to make Lao-Chinese border a border of lasting peace, friendship and cooperation.

To further strengthen friendly and good-neighborly relations and economic cooperation, China and the Laos signed in Vientiane on 31st January, 1993, "the Sino-Lao Agreement on Investment Protection" and "the Sino-Lao Boundary Protocol". Lao Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Phoun Sipaseut and visiting Chinese State Councillor and Foreign Minister Qian Qichen signed the two documents on behalf of their respective governments. After the signing ceremony, Sipaseut said that "we have completed today an important task of signing those two documents, which has laid down a solid foundation for the future cooperation between the two countries". The signing of "the Sino-Lao Boundary Protocol" will not only ensure security along the entire Sino-Lao border, but will also be conducive to maintaining peace and stability in the region," he said. Qian said that the signing of the "Sino-Lao Boundary Protocol" marks that "the two parties, the two countries and the peoples of the two countries have the determination to turn the Sino-Lao border into a lasting peaceful one". The successful settlement of the Sino-Lao border issue was not only a big event between China and the Laos, but also set a typical example for countries which have boundary problems with others and want to settle them, he said. The signing of the two documents has built a solid foundation for future mutual economic cooperation, which has a bright future, he said. Under "the Sino-Lao Border Treaty" signed in Beijing in October 1991, China and the Laos began boundary demarcation since January 1992 and completed the task within eight months. The protocol signed explained in detail the border delimitation, marking the total completion of the settlement and negotiations of the border issues between the two countries.

A signing ceremony on agreement of economic and technical cooperation between the governments of the Lao People's Democratic Republic and the People's Republic of China was held at the Laos-China Cooperation Commission (LCCC)' s office in conjunction with the prime minister's office on August 31, 1998. The signatories to the documents were Mr Mai-ean Inseng, LCCC chairman, and Mr Pan Quangxue, charge d'affaires of the Chinese embassy to Laos. The agreement stipulated that due to the demand of the Lao government' s socio-economic development, the government of China agreed to provide 10 million yuan (Chinese currency) of grant aid to the Lao government. Witnessing the singing of the agreement were Mr Saisomphon Phomvihan, minister, head of the cabinet of the Prime Minister's Office, president of the Laos-China Friendship Association and Mr Cai Wenju, economic and commercial counsellor of the China embassy to Laos, among others. Mr Mai-ean expressed on behalf of the Lao government and the Lao people gratitude and thanks, through Mr Pan, to the government and people of China for their great assistance to Laos.

The Chinese President Jiang Zemin began a state visit to Laos on November 11, 2000, on the first leg of a Southeast Asian tour that reflects China's desire to expand its influence in a region still recovering from economic crisis. Jiang, was received by Lao President Khamtay Siphandone at the Hor Kham presidential palace in Vientiane, and was due to meet other communist party leaders, including Prime Minister Sisavath Keobounphan, Lao officials said. After Laos, Jiang will travel to Cambodia on Monday before going to Brunei later in the week for a leaders' summit of the Asian Pacific Economic Cooperation forum. Analysts say the tour underscores China's efforts to extend its sway through trade, investment and diplomatic ties in a region, still feeling the effects of 1997 financial crash. Jiang's visit comes as Laos prepares to mark the 25th anniversary of communist rule on December 2, 2000. The Chinese president is scheduled to lay a wreath at a monument to Lao revolutionaries who died during the Vietnam War. China and Laos normalized relations in 1989, after ten years of discord following a border war between China and Vietnam, Laos' closest ally. Since then, ties with China have gradually expanded. Khamtay visited China in July. Economic uncertainties in Laos have pushed the regime closer to its 'fraternal' communist neighbors. The recession in Thailand, Laos' main trading partner and source of investment, had a serious knock-on effect, triggering hyperinflation in Laos during 1998-99 and currency weakness. That cast doubt over the aging Lao leadership's competence in managing the economy, which is heavily dependent on foreign aid. China has reportedly provided interest-free loans to prop up the Lao currency, the kip, which depreciated rapidly for three years but steadied this year. China has also boosted economic and military assistance. China has also helped build ground television satellite receiving stations and a hydroelectric power plant and electricity grid. A huge Chinese-funded Lao cultural center completed this year dominates one of Vientiane's main streets. While the mostly rural Lao population of 5 million offers only a small market for Chinese goods, the country is a valuable land link for China for exporting to Thailand and the rest of Southeast Asia. Although the Lao economy has stabilized this year, its government has faced a new crisis of confidence in security on the streets of the capital.

"In November 2000, a joint declaration on bilateral relations was signed during Jiang's visit to Laos, which provided guidance for fostering long-term friendly relations, cooperation, mutual-trust and good neighborliness between the two countries in the 21st century," Mayene recalled. To realize the vision shared by leaders of the two countries on the future of bilateral ties, concerned agencies of both countries have recently signed a series of agreements on trade, investment, land transport, tariff, extradition, education, banking and other aspects, which has laid a solid foundation for further friendly cooperation on the basis of mutual benefit, the Lao official said. According to Lao official figures, trade between Laos and China has been growing continuously in recent years. The two-way trade value reached 43.71m US dollars last year, up 13.7 per cent from that of the previous year, with China's exports to Laos accounting for 36.77m dollars and Lao exports to China 6.94m dollars. The bilateral trade is mostly operated in three Lao provinces bordering China and usually in the form of barter. Meanwhile, China has become a major investor in Laos during past few years and a large number of Chinese firms have made investments in the country. Last year alone, China invested in 10 Lao projects worth 6.21m dollars. Presently, total Chinese investment in Laos has reached 128m dollars, including 58 Chinese-owned projects and 37 joint ventures. "Moreover, China has offered a lot of soft loans and Official Direct Assistance (ODA) to Laos since 1989, which has greatly boosted the development of the Lao economy," said Mayene. According to the CLCC official, China's financial assistance to Laos in the past 13 years totalled 1.17bn dollars, including 339m dollars in ODA, 602m dollars in special loans and 228m dollars in non-interest loans. The cultural and educational exchanges between Laos and China are also progressing smoothly. Starting from the 1999-2000 academic year, China offers scholarship for 55 Lao students to study in Chinese universities every year. The annual scholarship quota will be increased to 230 students after 2005. In addition, China have provided professional and technological trainings for many Lao government officials, and bilateral exchanges are also active in the areas of media, recreation and sports. "Nowadays, the evidence of Laos-China cooperation can be witnessed everywhere in our country," said Mayene. One of the most famous concrete examples of the cooperation is the Lao National Cultural Palace, a grandiose building situated in the heartland of the Lao capital which was constructed with Chinese help. "The building has become a symbol for the cultural exchange and friendly relations between our two countries," said the Lao official. Another example is the two cement factories newly built as Sino-Lao joint ventures. With Chinese funding and technical assistance, the Wanrong Cement Factory One and Factory Two in the suburb of Vientiane have produced first batches of home-made cement products in the Lao history. "The two projects saved Laos a large sum of foreign exchanges which otherwise would have been spent in buying foreign cement. The two factories now contribute greatly to our social and economic development," noted Mayene. "China is a strategic partner of Laos, and the two countries share common rivers and borders, and, particularly, the centuries-long friendship," he said. "The two ruling parties, two countries and the two peoples of Laos and China have always supported each other and cemented a profound friendship, which I believe is now at the best ever stage, " said the Lao official. "The ever-growing all-around friendly relations and cooperation between the two countries will make significant contributions to both countries, the region and even the whole world," he concluded.

The Chinese Defense Minister Chi Haotian in Beijing on December 15, 2000, with Kenekham Senglathone, deputy chief of the General Staff of the Lao People's Army, and his party. Chi, also vice-chairman of the Central Military Commission, said that China and Laos are neighboring countries, and have forged a long-term friendship. He mentioned Chinese President Jiang Zemin's visit to Laos not long time ago, and said that the important visit was a milestone in the history of Sino-Lao relations. Chi said that military relations between China and Laos have developed smoothly, and the Sino-Lao friendly cooperation conforms to the fundamental interests of the two countries, and benefits regional peace, stability and development. He said that China is ready to work with Laos to promote the friendly cooperation between the two armed forces. Chi also briefed the guests on China's domestic situation and military development, and thanked Laos for adhering to the one-China stance. Kenekham expressed gratitude for China's support to Laos in the past, and hopes that China's reunification can be achieved at an early date.

On February 4, 2002, Chinese Premier Zhu Rongji promised visiting Lao Prime Minister Boungnang Vorachit more economic support and said China was "willing to extend such cooperation to all practical fields". The two leaders presided over a signing ceremony for five documents on soft loans from China to Laos, cooperation between central banks, extradition, economic support, and educational cooperation to 2005, the official Xinhua news agency said. "China is willing to work with Laos on agriculture, forestry, the exploitation of mineral resources and infrastructure construction," the agency quoted Zhu as saying. Zhu said China and Laos should increase exchanges between government departments and bordering provinces, and support each other in international and regional issues. One key cross-border project has involved officials from the southwestern Chinese province of Yunnan working in Laos to help local farmers develop alternative crops to opium poppies. China has blamed trafficking from the "Golden Triangle", which straddles areas of Laos, Myanmar, Thailand and China, for rising drug use in recent years. Since the early 1990s, it has helped former opium-growers resettled from remote mountains to lowland areas of Laos to grow sugar cane and other crops. "It is not a final solution for us only to check for drugs at the border. We must block the inflow of drugs from outside China," Sun Dahong, head of the Yunnan drug control agency, told the official China Daily.

The centuries-old China-Laos friendly relations and cooperation have been developing steadily in an all-around way in recent years and will further prosper in the future, a Lao official said on May 12, 2002. "Leaders of the two countries have frequently exchanged visits, calling on each other like close relatives," Mayene Inseng, president of the Committee for Laos-China Cooperation (CLCC), a Lao government agency in charge of cooperation with China, told Xinhua during an exclusive interview. He noted that after Chinese President Jiang Zemin and Lao President Khamtai Siphandon exchanged state visits in 2000, Lao Prime Minister Boun-gnang Volachit visited China in February this year.

The Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao said on 30 November 2004 that China will stick to its friendly policy towards Laos no matter how the world situation changes. "The Chinese government attaches great importance to the good neighborly cooperative relations with Laos," Wen said when meeting with President of the Lao National Assembly Saman Vi-Gnaket on the sidelines of the 10th Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) summit here. China is willing to work together with the Lao side to promote the long-term stable, comprehensive and good-neighborly relations of mutual trust, Wen noted, expressing his support for exchanges and cooperation between legislatures of both sides. Wen also congratulated Laos on the successful convening of a series of ASEAN-related meetings in Vientiane. Samane said Wen's visit to Laos will promote their friendly relations of cooperation, stressing that China's help is a key to the successful convening of the ASEAN meetings. The Lao people appreciate the assistance provided by China over the years and the Lao legislatures will make more efforts for the Lao-Chinese friendship, he added. Wen arrived for his first official visit to Laos as premier and the ASEAN-related meetings.

Laos highly appreciates China's policy of promoting trade and investment in Laos, said Lao Deputy Prime Minister Thongloun Sisolit while meeting with a Chinese Trade Ministry delegation headed by its Deputy Minister Guang Zhou on October 3, 2005. Sisolit, who is also Chairman of the Lao Planning and Investment Committee, said two-way trade has increased rapidly in many areas, helping narrow Lao trade deficit. China's investment in Laos has also surged annually, he added. China has given member countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) a special priority for exporting over 300 products into China, including those from Laos, Sisolit said. In addition, China helped Laos build a university, improving the Lao Radio and Television Stations, and many other projects in energy and communications. The Chinese Trade delegation visited Laos to attend the 37th ASEAN Economic Ministers Meeting, held in Laos on September 28, 2005.

On June 29, 2006, the Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao said China encourages companies to increase investment in Laos, and will help Laos introduce its export commodities to China. Wen made the remarks during a meeting with the general secretary of the Central Committee of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party and Lao President Choummaly Sayasone. "China is highly concerned about Laos' development," Wen said, noting that China is ready to help Laos devise management training programs, to support the development of Laos' infrastructure, and to continue providing assistance to Laos for its social and economic development. Wen said that with the joint efforts of both nations, China and Laos will achieve a more fruitful bilateral cooperation in various fields, and the China-Laos relations would be lifted to a higher level. Expressing satisfaction on the current development of China-Laos relations, Choummaly said Laos is ready to work with China to increase the mutually-beneficial cooperation in various fields, and to push for the development of traditional friendship between the two countries. Chinese Vice President Zeng Qinghong also met with Choummaly, saying that to promote China-Laos friendly cooperative relations is an unwavering policy of the Communist Party of China and the Chinese government. China will join Laos to implement the important consensus reached by the Chinese and Lao top leaders to push for bilateral cooperation, and will be a good friend, good neighbor and good partner to Laos forever, Zeng noted.

China is ready to further strengthen exchanges and cooperation with Laos, said Liu Qi, a senior official of the Communist Party of China (CPC), in Beijing on August 28, 2006. Liu, a member of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee, said the CPC attaches great importance to China-Laos relations and is ready to further bilateral cooperation in reform and opening up and economic development. China and Laos are friendly neighbors with common aspiration and objectives, noted Liu, who is also secretary of the CPC Beijing Municipal Committee. Liu made the remarks while meeting with Pany Yathotou, member of the Political Bureau of Lao People's Revolutionary Party and vice president of National Assembly of Laos. Pany headed a Lao party delegation for a 11-day visit to China aimed at exchanging views with the CPC on reform and opening-up, economic development and party building. Pany spoke highly of the development of China-Laos relations. She said the Lao party, government and people are greatly encouraged by China's achievements in social and economic development, adding she hoped the two sides would support and learn from each other, and jointly promote the socialist cause.

PS-SOURCES: New York Times March 14, 1959, July 28, 1959, BBC March 16, 1979, March 17, 1979, June 18, 1979, August 6, 1982, December 1, 1987, December 10, 1987, May 12, 2002, November 30, 2004, Xinhua March 27, 1979, December 25, 1986, December 21, 1988, June 2, 1989, August 15, 1989, October 9, 1989, January 27, 1992, February 1, 1993, September 3, 1998, December 15, 2000, June 29, 2006, August 28, 2006, Globe and Mail September 20, 1979, Washington Post March 16, 1979, Associated Press September 13, 1991, November 11, 2000, China Daily January 26, 1999, Thai Press Reports October 3, 2005, Deutsche Presse-Agentur February 4, 2002

MARITIME-MIDS:

MARITIME-DISPUTE:

Discussion:

SOURCES: Gibler, D.M. 2018. Militarized Interstate Dispute Narratives, 1816-2010. Langham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. 
