FILE: cm750780v11.0.txt
DYAD: INDIA-SRI LANKA
RIVALRY: RIV1342
DISPUTE(S): MID3037 MID2778 MID3918 MID3571 

RIVNOTES: 

PS: 19480204-19830721 0.5 19830722-19841216 -9 19841217-19900324 0.00 19900325-20209999 0.5

PS-UPDATE2020:

PSNOTES: 

PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20220324
PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20220324

Territorial-Maritime-Boundary Issues Variables

MID3037

TERRMID: MID3037 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID3037 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID3037 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID3037 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID3037 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID3037 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: MID3037 there is no indication that the maritime boundary in the strait was being disputed. 

ISLMID: MID3037 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID3037 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID3037 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID3037 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID3037 from Gibler 2018, in 1984-1985 Sri Lanka, fighting against separatist rebels who were being supported by the Indian government, increased naval patrols in the strait between India and Sri Lanka. India accused Sri Lanka of attacking civilians, and Sri Lanka attacked Indian fishing vessels. India deployed warships to the strait. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to militarized rebels in Sri Lanka, within this dyad. 

CIVWARLINK: MID3037 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID3037 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID3037 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID3037 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID3037 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID3037 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID2778

TERRMID: MID2778 3 -- not territory
TERRMID-CER: MID2778 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID2778 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID2778 1 -- certain
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID2778 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID2778 1 -- certain
MARITMID-NOTES: MID2778 there is no indication that the maritime boundary in the strait was being disputed. 

ISLMID: MID2778 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID2778 1 -- certain
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID2778 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID2778 1 -- certain
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID2778 from Gibler 2018, in 1987 Sri Lanka sunk an Indian ship carrying weapons to Tamil rebels in Sri Lanka. On another occasion, Sri Lanka stopped several Indian ships carrying weapons to Sri Lankan rebels. India also air-dropped supplies to the rebels, prompting Sri Lanka to protest the airspace violation. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to militarized rebels in Sri Lanka. 

CIVWARLINK: MID2778 3 -- not civil war link
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID2778 1 -- certain
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID2778 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID2778 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID2778 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID2778 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID3918 

TERRMID: MID3918 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID3918 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID3918 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID3918 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID3918 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID3918 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID3918 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID3918 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID3918 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID3918 3 -- uncertain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID3918 from Gibler, Miller, and Little 2016, a Sri Lankan soldier fired on Indian peacekeepers that had been invited to the country to help keep peace between Sri Lankan forces and rebel forces. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to militarized rebels in Sri Lanka. Coded uncertain because GML recommend this MID be dropped; India was invited into the country, and this should therefore not be considered a MID. 

CIVWARLINK: MID3918 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID3918 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID3918 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID3918 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID3918 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID3918 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID3571 

TERRMID: MID3571 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID3571 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID3571 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID3571 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID3571 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID3571 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID3571 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID3571 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID3571 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID3571 3 -- uncertain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID3571 from Gibler, Miller, and Little 2016, Indian peacekeepers had been invited to the country by Sri Lanka. In 1992, Sri Lankan rebels clashed with Sri Lankan troops, and the rebels assassinated India's Prime Minister in retaliation for India deploying peacekeepers. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to militarized rebels in Sri Lanka. Coded uncertain because GML recommend this case be dropped; no clash between Sri Lanka and India occurred. 

CIVWARLINK: MID3571 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID3571 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID3571 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID3571 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID3571 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID3571 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID4587 

TERRMID: MID4587 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID4587 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID4587 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID4587 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID4587 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID4587 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: MID4587 from Gibler 2018 and cm narrative, in 2008 Sri Lanka fired on Indian fishing vessels for fishing in Sri Lankan waters. India protested the attack, but there is no indiction that India disagreed that the fishermen were in Sri Lanka's waters. Coded not maritime because the dyad was not disputing a maritime boundary. 

ISLMID: MID4587 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4587 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4587 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4587 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARLINK: MID4587 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4587 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID4587 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4587 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4587 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4587 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID4 2002-2010:

MID4587
rivalry=750780 nationa=SRI LANKA nationb=INDIA MID4587 20080712-20081027 
 revtype1a=POLICY revtype2a=NOT APPLICABLE fatala=NONE fatalpa=0 lhosta=USE OF FORCE 
 revtype1b=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2b=NOT APPLICABLE fatalb=NONE fatalpb=0 lhostb=
NO MILITARIZED ACTION 

Sri Lankan naval vessels twice attacked Indian fishermen for entering Sri Lankan waters. First day of dispute was on 7/12/2008 and last day of dispute was on 10/27/2008.

NARRATIVE-CM:
Indian and Sri Lankan representatives signed an agreement in Delhi on October 30, 1964, which dealt with the status of some 975,000 individuals of Indian origin in Sri Lanka. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi of India held negotiations with Prime Minister Bandaranaike of Sri Lanka in Colombo on April 27-29, 1973. Sri Lanka granted citizenship to some 60,000 individuals of Indian origin in Sri Lanka, and repatriated some 106,000 of the individuals by December 1973. Prime Minister Sirimavo Bandaranaike of Sri Lanka and Prime Minister Indira Gandhi of India held negotiations in New Delhi on January 22-27, 1974. The leaders issued a joint communique on January 29, 1974, which announced an agreement concerning 150,000 individuals of Indian origin remaining in Sri Lanka. Some 75,000 of the individuals would be granted Sri Lankan citizenship, and some 75,000 of the individuals would be repatriated to India. Prime Minister Gandhi of India and Prime Minister Bandaranaike of Sri Lanka signed an agreement on June 28, 1974, which provided for the demarcation of the maritime border in the Palk Strait and provided for India's recognition of Sri Lanka's claim to Kackchativu Island. India and Sri Lanka signed a maritime border agreement on March 23, 1976, and the countries ratified the agreement on May 10, 1976. India provided military assistance (training and weapons) to a Sri Lankan secessionist group, the *Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam* (LTTE), beginning in 1983. Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi of India accused Sri Lanka of "indiscriminate killing" in the Tamil separatist dispute on December 11, 1984. The Sri Lankan government responded to Gandhi's statement on December 15, 1984, suggesting that "the government of India is one obstruction that stands in our way of finding a peaceful solution to this internal problem of ours." Two Indian fishermen were killed by Sri Lankan naval forces on January 7, 1985. A Sri Lankan naval patrol boat was seized by an Indian coastguard ship in Indian territorial waters on January 11, 1985, but the boat and seven-member crew were released on January 24, 1985. The Sri Lankan government accused India on January 29, 1985 of providing military assistance (training and weapons) to the Tamil rebels. Two Indian fishermen were killed by Sri Lankan naval forces on February 13, 1985. Indian Foreign Secretary Romesh Bhandari held talks with Sri Lankan President Junius Jayawardene in Colombo on March 24-28, 1985. President Jayawardene held talks with Indian Prime Minister Gandhi in New Delhi on June 1-3, 1985. An Indian fishing boat was attacked inside Indian territorial waters by Sri Lankan naval forces on August 24, 1985. President Jayawardene and Prime Minister Gandhi held further talks at the *Commonwealth of Nations* meeting of heads-of-state in Nassau, Bahamas on Octoner 16-22, 1985, and again at the *South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation* (SAARC) summit meeting in Dhaka, Bangladesh on December 7-8, 1985. On May 19, 1986, the Indian government condemned a Sri Lanka military campaign against the Tamils in the northern Jaffna peninsula that began on May 17, 1986. The Indian government decided in June 1987 to provide food assistance to the Tamils in Sri Lanka. The Sri Lankan navy intercepted an Indian food convoy on June 3, 1987. Indian aircraft, which were protected by the Indian airforce, dropped 22 tons of food supplies to the Tamils on June 4, 1987. Sri Lanka issued a formal complaint to the Indian government on June 5, 1987. Prime Minister Gandhi negotiated a ceasefire agreement with President Jayawardene on July 29, 1987, and the Sri Lankan government requested Indian peacekeeping troops to enforce the ceasefire agreement. Some 3,000 Indian peacekeeping troops were deployed in Jaffna on July 30, 1987, and India eventually deployed more than 65,000 peacekeeping troops in Sri Lanka. *The ceasefire was broken in October 1987 when Tamil rebels captured Jaffna, resulting in the deaths of some 190 individuals. Indian troops recaptured Jaffna on October 24, 1987, resulting in the deaths of 460 Indian soldiers, 400 LTTE rebels, and 1,000 civilians. The Sri Lankan government and Tamil rebels agreed to a ceasefire in May 1989. Sri Lanka asked India to withdraw its peacekeeping force on June 1, 1989. India completed the withdrawal of its troops from Sri Lanka on March 24, 1990.

SOURCES-CM: Brecher and Wilkenfeld, 1997, 560-561; *Keesing,* November 14-21, 1964, August 6-12, 1973, March 18-24, 1974, July 22-28, 1974, October 15, 1976, September 1984, May 1985, May 1986, January 1987, August 1987; Weisburd, 1997, 232-234.

NARRATIVE-CR:
The rivalry between India and Sri Lanka is over the status of a group of ethnic Indians called Tamils living in northern and eastern Sri Lanka. From 1757 on Tamils have been migrating to Ceylon/Sri Lanka to escape poverty in Tamil Nadu and to take opportunities for work on rubber plantations in Ceylon. By the time of independence, Tamils made up about 20% of the population. Tamils are Hindu while Sri Lankans are Buddhist. Tamils have complained of discrimination in all aspects of life in Sri Lanka. Ethic tensions erupted into full-scale insurgency in 1983 with the Tamil Tigers leading the campaign. 

MID3037 occurs from December 1984 through January of 1985. Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi of India accused Sri Lanka of "indiscriminate killing" in the Tamil separatist dispute on December 11, 1984. The Sri Lankan government responded to Gandhi's statement on December 15, 1984, suggesting, "the government of India is one obstruction that stands in our way of finding a peaceful solution to this internal problem of ours." Two Indian fishermen were killed by Sri Lankan naval forces on January 7, 1985. An Indian coastguard ship in Indian territorial waters seized a Sri Lankan naval patrol boat on January 11, 1985, but the boat and seven-member crew were released on January 24, 1985. The Sri Lankan government accused India on January 29, 1985 of providing military assistance (training and weapons) to the Tamil rebels. Two Indian fishermen were killed by Sri Lankan naval forces on February 13, 1985. 

MID2778 occurred from March through June of 1987. This was the Sri Lankan Civil War. The Sri Lankan armed forces launched an offensive against the Tamil Tigers on 26 May 1987. This generated a massive pressure groupo in Tamil Nadu, a southern state in India. This pressure group urged the Indian government to take action. The Indian proposal was to send relief supplies to the northern and eastern provinces of Sri Lanka where the ethnic Tamils are concentrated. The Sri Lankan's wanted to be notified in the event the Indians took this action. On 3 June 19 Indian fishing boats attempted to enter Sri Lankan waters with relief supplies but were turned back by the Sri Lankan navy. On 4 June the Indian Air Force dropped supplies in the northern provinces. Indian Mirage fighter jets escorted the transport aircraft. This triggered a crisis for Sri Lankan sovereignty that was later resolved through talks and a peace plan in July.

MID3918 occurred on 7/15/1989. Indian troops were deployed to enforce a July 1987 agreement between Sri Lanka and India to end a guerrilla war by separatists of the island's Tamil minority, which is mostly Hindu. Colombo demanded that India's 45,000 troops withdraw by July 29, the second anniversary of the Indo-Sri Lankan accord, noting that violence increased since they arrived. Between two and four Indian troops were killed and one Sri Lankan soldier wounded in a firefight in northeastern Sri Lanka. 

MID3571 occurred from 3/11 to 3/17 1992. Here members of the Tamil Tiger separatist group assassinated Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi. 

In 1990s, India kept its distance from the ongoing conflict in Sri Lanka. In May of 2000, the Indian Navy offered to assist Sri Lankan military forces cut off from reinforcements by advancing Tamil troops. In the 1990s the Prime Minister, Mr A.B. Vajpayee, that India was ready ``if necessary'' to help Sri Lanka.

Sri Lanka has entered a post-conflict phase in 2002 and 2003, the LTTE or Tamil Tigers, seemed to moderate their demands for an independent state. Instead they are now seeking greater political and economic autonomy within Sri Lanka. This has ameliorated tensions between India and Sri Lanka. 

SOURCES-CR: 
Brecher and Wilkenfeld, 1997, 560-561; Keesing, November 14-21, 1964, August 6-12, 1973, March 18-24, 1974, July 22-28, 1974, October 15, 1976, September 1984, May 1985, May 1986, January 1987, August 1987; Weisburd, 1997, 232-234; United Press International, July 15, 1989 (Lexus Nexus Academic).

PS-NARRATIVE: 

19480204-19830721 0.5

Sri Lanka became independent on February 4, 1948. On May 17, 1952, in a conciliatory note to the government of Ceylon, India suggested that the two countries `agree to differ' on the question of Indians' status in Ceylon. Previously, New Delhi protested the disenfranchisement of all but 8000 of the 800000 Indians living in the country, from the national Ceylonese elections. On July 16, 1953, India and Ceylon signed a mutual trade pact aimed to lower tariffs. On October 11, 1954, Ceylon's Prime Minister Sir John Kotelawela said that he and India's Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru had reached an agreement on the dispute regarding the fate of 850000 Indians living in Ceylon. On December 26, 1957, the government of Ceylon asked for help from India's Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru to fight the floods that affected many parts of the island. Ceylon asked for light planes and helicopters that could be used for search and rescue missions. On December 29, 1960, Mrs. Sirimavo Bandaranaike, made an official visit to Delhi, as the first visit outside Ceylon, and also as the first woman Prime Minister. In December 1962, Ceylon played the role of mediator in the dispute between India and China. On October 29, 1964, India and Ceylon reached an agreement about the status of Indian born people living in Ceylon. India will grant citizenship to 525000 and Ceylon will grant citizenship to 300000 Indians. Further talks will be held to determine the fate of another 150000 people.

The sixth meeting of the sub-committee for economic cooperation of the India-Sri Lanka joint commission for economic, trade and technical cooperation ended in Colombo on July 1, 1978. According to a joint statement issued after the meeting, four working groups on trade, technical cooperation, cooperation in industry and in agriculture have been established. The statement said that it was also agreed to establish a technical consultancy organization in Sri Lanka, through which Indian technical expertise could be made available to local medium and small sized industries. It said that the expansion of Indo-Sri Lanka trade was discussed by the two delegations, and the possibility of Sri Lanka supplying cloves, cocoa, beans, coconut oil, gems, graphite, cement and fertilizer was considered. India offered to supply commodities including sugar, machinery and equipment to Sri Lanka, it said. The statement said that the two countries agreed to continue cooperation in the field of shipping, and discussed the feasibility of joint promotional arrangements for the exchange of tourists.

Sri Lanka President J. R. Jayewardene arrived in New Delhi on October 27, 1978, to pay a state visit to India. A joint press statement said that the two sides agreed to increase trade flows and to stimulate Indian investment in joint ventures in Sri Lanka, according to a report from New Delhi. The statement said that President Jayewardene held talks with Indian Prime Minister Desai on expanding bilateral cooperation. At a civic reception held in his honor in New Delhi on October 29, President Jayewardene said that many spheres of cooperation had opened up as a result of his visit. Prime Minister Desai said that India and Sri Lanka had good relations which were being further strengthened by the president's visit. President Jayewardene left New Delhi to continue his tour of other parts of India.

On 5th February, 1979, the Sri Lankan Prime Minister, Premasada, gave a dinner in honour of Morarji Desai, during which the Indian Prime Minister spoke about the great possibilities which existed for the two countries to co-operate in economic development. It was his hope, he said, that they could co-operate even more closely in the future in establishing a new international economic order in a peaceful and progressive world. A joint statement issued at the end of Desai's visit to Sri Lanka said that India and Sri Lanka would take steps to increase trade between them, and would also set up joint ventures for exports. It was agreed that they would also develop co-operation in cultural affairs, research and development. Desai and the Sri Lankan President Jayewardene also reviewed the regional and international situation, on which there was a close identity of views. The statement said that Buddhist pilgrims from Sri Lanka visiting India were to be provided with more facilities; and that the Sri Lankan Prime Minister had accepted an invitation to visit India at a mutually convenient time. Speaking to newsmen, he described his visit to Sri Lanka as "quite good".

19830722-19841216 Transition

On July 22, 1983, Sri Lanka has expressed its displeasure over India's interference in the internal affairs of this country. The Sri Lankan Foreign Minister A.C.S. Hameed told parliament that he summoned the Indian acting high commissioner in Sri Lanka, R. M. Abhyankar to the foreign ministry on July 20, 1983, to tell him that the Sri Lankan government was displeased with India's attitude toward the measures taken in Jaffna district of northern Sri Lanka. It was reported that Sri Lanka's high commissioner in New Delhi had been called to the Indian Ministry of External Affairs to hear India's unhappiness about Sri Lanka's promulgation of emergency regulations against violent activities in the Jaffna district. The Indian high commissioner was told that India's concern was all the more surprising as no Indians were affected by the measures taken in the Jaffna district.

The Indian government has expressed its concern over the violence in Sri Lanka but pledged not to interfere in the internal affairs of another country, it was learnt in New Delhi on July 28, 1983. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi reportedly told parliament members that her government had conveyed the concern through diplomatic channel to the Sri Lankan government over the violence and harassment of Tamils and Indian nationals in northern Sri Lanka and hoped that calm would be restored in the country soon. The Indian foreign minister P.V. Nwrasimha Rao affirmed in the parliament that "developments affecting the Tamil population in Sri Lanka give rise to feelings on the Indian side and can create situations of strain." In a statement, he observed, "it is naturally a matter of anxiety for all of us that Indian nationals and property have been affected by the cycle of violence in Sri Lanka." The Foreign Minister said that he hoped to discuss the problem with the Foreign Minister of Sri Lanka, when the latter visits New Delhi on July 30, 1983, to attend the South Asian Regional Cooperation meeting.

Violent demonstrations spread through southern India on August 2, 1983, as tens of thousands of Indian Tamils protested the killings of Tamils in ethnic clashes in Sri Lanka. Officials reported police shot and killed three people in Kolar, a gold mining area 1,060 miles south of New Delhi, when demonstrators organized by a Tamil political party became a rock-throwing mob. They said 50 policemen and scores of civilians were injured in street battles. In Tamil Nadu, India's southernmost state that is just north of Sri Lanka, 17 people attempted to burn themselves to death to protest the killings of more than 200 people in week-long riots between Sri Lanka's minority Tamils and majority Sinhalese, United News of India said. It said 14 people preparing to set themselves afire were arrested in Salem district, 175 miles southwest of the Tamil Nadu capital of Madras, and three others were hospitalized with burns. Protests accusing the Sri Lankan government of genocide also were reported in New Delhi, Lucknow, Calcutta and Bombay. Parliament debated the Sri Lanka situation and Foreign Minister P.V. Narasimha Rao told the legislators "there is substance" to a report that he said was filed by an American newsman saying Sri Lanka had asked four countries for security pledges in event of a foreign attack. He said Sri Lanka denied the report and expelled the journalist who filed it, Stewart Slavin of United Press International. Rao said India has asked the four nations named, the United States, Britain, Pakistan and Bangladesh, about the report. Indian Tamils have demanded that India intervene to stop the killings of Sri Lanka's Tamils, who are of Indian origin. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi has not responded to those demands. India's High Commission in London issued a statement declaring "There is absolutely no truth in the allegation that India is planning to attack Sri Lanka." About 70 percent of Sri Lanka's 15 million people are Sinhalese and 20 percent are Tamils. India's Tamil Nadu state alone has nearly 50 million Tamils. In Tamil Nadu, nearly all shops, factories, state and central government offices, schools and road, rail and air transportation services shut down for 14 hours.

On June 1, 1984, the Indian External Ministry deplored the language used in a statement by the Sri Lankan Prime Minister the previous week. The spokesman of the ministry said that the use of "intemperate language" was against India and Prime Minister Mrs. Indira Gandhi personally. According to Sri Lanka's newspaper "the daily mirror," the Sri Lankan Prime Minister Ranasinghe Premadasa said on May 24, 1984, in parliament, "India should not play hide and seek with us. India should invade us openly and we are prepared to lay down our lives to defend our country." The newspaper reported that the Prime Minister said that if India was a true friend of Sri Lanka then the Indian government should express its friendship by extraditing hundreds of known terrorists now living in India, and the country should stop bullying Sri Lanka. Premadasa said that India should not attempt to weaken Sri Lanka by posing an invasion threat. The spokesman of the Indian external ministry said that the charges and accusations hurled at India were totally without basis, adding this would harm the long-standing friendship between the two countries. He said during the last few days there has been an organized campaign in a section of the Sri Lanka press making unwarranted and meaningless charges against India. The spokesman said the government of India was bringing these serious developments to the notice of the Sri Lanka president.

President Junius Jayewardene of Sri Lanka arrived ON July 1, 1984, for talks with Prime Minister Indira Gandhi. Officials in both countries have said Mr. Jayewardene's talks with Mrs. Gandhi will center on the tension between the majority Sinhalese and minority Tamils in Sri Lanka.

The first MID of RIV1342, MID3037 occurred from December 1984 through January of 1985. Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi of India accused Sri Lanka of "indiscriminate killing" in the Tamil separatist dispute on December 11, 1984. The Sri Lankan government responded to Gandhi's statement on December 15, 1984, suggesting, "the government of India is one obstruction that stands in our way of finding a peaceful solution to this internal problem of ours." Two Indian fishermen were killed by Sri Lankan naval forces on January 7, 1985. An Indian coastguard ship in Indian territorial waters seized a Sri Lankan naval patrol boat on January 11, 1985, but the boat and seven-member crew were released on January 24, 1985. The Sri Lankan government accused India on January 29, 1985 of providing military assistance (training and weapons) to the Tamil rebels. Two Indian fishermen were killed by Sri Lankan naval forces on February 13, 1985.

A Sri Lankan naval patrol boat was seized by an Indian coastguard ship in Indian territorial waters on January 11, 1985, but the boat and seven-member crew were released on January 24, 1985. The Sri Lankan government accused India on January 29, 1985 of providing military assistance (training and weapons) to the Tamil rebels. Two Indian fishermen were killed by Sri Lankan naval forces on February 13, 1985. Indian Foreign Secretary Romesh Bhandari held talks with Sri Lankan President Junius Jayawardene in Colombo on March 24-28, 1985. President Jayawardene held talks with Indian Prime Minister Gandhi in New Delhi on June 1-3, 1985. An Indian fishing boat was attacked inside Indian territorial waters by Sri Lankan naval forces on August 24, 1985. President Jayawardene and Prime Minister Gandhi held further talks at the *Commonwealth of Nations* meeting of heads-of-state in Nassau, Bahamas on October 16-22, 1985, and again at the *South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation* (SAARC) summit meeting in Dhaka, Bangladesh on December 7-8, 1985. On May 19, 1986, the Indian government condemned a Sri Lanka military campaign against the Tamils in the northern Jaffna peninsula that began on May 17, 1986. The Indian government decided in June 1987 to provide food assistance to the Tamils in Sri Lanka. The Sri Lankan navy intercepted an Indian food convoy on June 3, 1987. Indian aircraft, which were protected by the Indian airforce, dropped 22 tons of food supplies to the Tamils on June 4, 1987. Sri Lanka issued a formal complaint to the Indian government on June 5, 1987. Prime Minister Gandhi negotiated a ceasefire agreement with President Jayawardene on July 29, 1987, and the Sri Lankan government requested Indian peacekeeping troops to enforce the ceasefire agreement. Some 3,000 Indian peacekeeping troops were deployed in Jaffna on July 30, 1987, and India eventually deployed more than 65,000 peacekeeping troops in Sri Lanka. *The ceasefire was broken in October 1987 when Tamil rebels captured Jaffna, resulting in the deaths of some 190 individuals. Indian troops recaptured Jaffna on October 24, 1987, resulting in the deaths of 460 Indian soldiers, 400 LTTE rebels, and 1,000 civilians. The Sri Lankan government and Tamil rebels agreed to a ceasefire in May 1989. Sri Lanka asked India to withdraw its peacekeeping force on June 1, 1989. India completed the withdrawal of its troops from Sri Lanka on March 24, 1990.

19900325-20159999 0.5

Sri Lanka has offered all possible assistance to India in investigating the assassination of Indian former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi. The offer was made by Sri Lankan Prime Minister Dingiri Banda Wijetunge when he called on Indian Prime Minister Chandra Shekhar on May 26, 1991. Sri Lanka's offer came as investigating agencies worked on a possible involvement of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) in Rajiv Gandhi's assassination. The LTTE is a Tamil militant organization which wants to establish an independent state in Sri Lanka. Many militants of the LTTE live in Madras, capital of India's southern state of Tamil Nadu, taking it as their base. Rajiv Gandhi was killed in a powerful bomb explosion near Madras. Wijetunge represented Sri Lanka at Rajiv Gandhi's funeral.

The last MID of RIV1342, MID3571 occurred from March 11 to March 17, 1992. I could not find any specific information about this MID.

On May 21, 1992, India's government indicted the chief of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, a hard-line Sri Lankan separatist group, on charges of directing the conspiracy that led a suicide bomber to assassinate former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi one year ago. The indictment filed in a Madras court named Villaphallai Prabhakaran, the Tamil guerrilla leader who has been fighting in the Sri Lankan jungles for nearly a decade, as the main accused in what the indictment described as a plot that was "meant to be a perfect crime." Prabhakaran's intelligence chief and 39 others were also named in the indictment. The Tigers' alleged motive arises from the tangled history of India's involvement with Sri Lanka's multiple and bloody ethnic wars. The Tigers, seeking an independent homeland for Sri Lanka's ethnic Tamil minority, fought a two-year, successful guerrilla war against Indian army troops who were ordered to Sri Lanka by Gandhi in 1987. During the negotiations that led to the deployment, Prabhakaran was once flown to New Delhi for a private meeting with the then-prime minister. After the talks, Prabhakaran declared in Sri Lanka that Gandhi had betrayed the Tamil cause and would pay for it, according to a published text of the speech. The indictment sets the stage for an expected effort by India to seek Prabhakaran's extradition. Sri Lanka has been attempting to locate, capture or kill Prabhakaran for three years without success. Gandhi died on May 21, 1991, at a political rally in India's southern Tamil Nadu state, long an offshore base for the Tamil guerrilla operations. A young Tamil woman, after handing Gandhi a garland, detonated a bomb that she was wearing, killing herself, the former prime minister, and more than 10 others. The suicide bomber has been identified as a native of Batticaloa town in Sri Lanka and the daughter of a senior Tamil ideologist. She reportedly joined the Tigers' hard-core cadres, whose guerrillas carry cyanide capsules and pledge to commit suicide to avoid capture. Indian police said they broke the conspiracy because the team of assassins hired a local Indian photographer to take pictures of the bombing. The photographer died in the explosion, but his camera was found and contained pictures of some of those allegedly involved.

On September 10, 1992, Sri Lanka and India have agreed to take effective steps to strengthen their trade and economic relations. The Indo-Sri Lankan sub-commission on economic cooperation, during its meeting in New Delhi on September 7-8, focused its attention on further increase in bilateral trade, which is expected to grow rapidly as a result of India's decision to liberalize its economy, according to Foreign Ministry sources in Colombo.

On April 21, 1994, India and Sri Lanka agreed to expand bilateral cooperation in several fields. The entire gamut of bilateral ties came up for discussion on the opening day of the Indo-Sri Lanka Joint Commission session in New Delhi. The two sides reviewed cooperation in trade, finance, investment, social, cultural and educational matters and in science and technology. The details were discussed later by the three sub-commissions set up for the purpose. Opening the meeting, the external affairs minister, Mr Dinesh Singh, observed that the bilateral relations between the two countries in the past three years have been marked by understanding, friendship, and cooperation. Responding, the Sri Lankan counterpart, Mr A.C.S. Hameed, said that Colombo looks forward to a meaningful discussion in all areas covered by the Joint Commission.

In 1995, five years after India completed withdrawing 100,000 troops from Sri Lanka, the Indian Government has responded to calls for help there by setting up what amounts to a naval quarantine around the Tamil Tiger guerrilla stronghold at Jaffna on Sri Lanka's northern coast. Indian military officials recently confirmed that navy vessels and air force surveillance planes had been ordered to enforce an embargo across the Palk Strait, which separates the two countries at India's southeastern tip. Reports in newspapers in India and Sri Lanka have suggested that the operation has extended farther, taking Indian vessels and aircraft deeper into the Indian Ocean in a bid to seal off Sri Lanka's northeastern coast. The aim of the quarantine is to help Sri Lanka's small fleet of gunboats to intercept the flotilla of fast-moving, flat-bottomed Tamil Tiger craft that keep the guerrillas supplied with weapons, ammunition and fuel, among other items. Some of the Tiger supplies, Indian officials said, are ferried from supply bases in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu across the shallow Palk Strait, which is 22 miles across at its narrowest point; other shipments reach the Tigers after being transferred at sea from freighters that originate in Singapore and Thailand. The Indian measures have been accompanied by another move that reflects a conviction in New Delhi and Colombo, the Sri Lankan capital, that the Colombo Government faces a protracted war that it cannot win without outside help. Six months of peace talks with the Tamil Tigers, and an accompanying cease-fire, gave way in late April to new fighting, initiated by the Tigers, that has resulted in the deaths of at least 500 fighters on both sides, as well as of scores of civilians. Since 1991, the Indian Government had stopped short of entering a formal extradition request for the arrest and deportation to India of Vellupillai Prabhakaran, the Tamil Tiger leader, who heads a list of Tamil militants indicted in India for the suicide bombing in May 1991 that killed Rajiv Gandhi, the former Indian Prime Minister. But in early June, Indian officials traveled to Colombo with documents formally requesting Mr. Prabhakaran's extradition, and Sri Lankan officials said the request would be speedily processed. The extradition move seemed likely to have little practical effect, since Mr. Prabhakaran has long eluded all attempts to capture him. In holding off an extradition bid, India was motivated partly by the fact that Mr. Prabhakaran was a leading beneficiary of Indian policies in the 1980's that included establishing training camps for the Tamil fighters in Tamil Nadu and providing them with weapons. But also, Indian officials said, New Delhi did not want to do anything that could have deterred him from negotiating for an end to the war with the Sri Lankan Government that was elected last year. "We want a stable, united Sri Lanka," said a senior Indian official who discussed New Delhi's recent moves. "Our interests are not served by chaos in Sri Lanka."

On October 13, 1997, the Leader of opposition in Sri Lanka and its former Prime Minister, Mr. Ranil Wickremesinghe, called for a "new agreement" with India on the basic "principles" of a common bilateral agenda for the next millennium. Matching the present "shift in paradigm" in international relations from military-strategic alliances to economic linkages, India and Sri Lanka must "look anew" to "bring the economic systems of the two countries much closer." In an exclusive interview to The Hindu in Colombo on the eve of his departure for India on a nine-day official visit, Mr. Wickremesinghe said: "There can be a set of (India-Sri Lanka) agreements as well as other understandings, written or unwritten ones, in trade and other economic spheres." The objective, according to him, is to create a new relationship between these two "contiguous democracies." As in Europe and elsewhere, a futuristic India-Sri Lanka economic alliance could be an integral part of an overarching South Asian multilateral framework. In particular, Sri Lanka and South India (extending up to Mumbai) must fashion "some special relationship" in the economic sphere, he said. Mr. Wickremesinghe will arrive in Chennai tomorrow on his way to Bangalore and later New Delhi where he will hold talks with the Prime Minister, Mr. I. K. Gujral, and the Leader of Opposition, Mr. A. B. Vajpayee, besides a number of top Indian political leaders and captains of industry. Mr. Wickremesinghe will be assisted by his close aide, Mr. Milinda Moragoda, and Mr. V. K. Valsan, formerly Sri Lanka's Deputy High Commissioner in Chennai. The visit is at the invitation of Mr. Gujral. Mr. Wickremesinghe said: "You won't need strategic-military scenarios for Sri Lanka-India relations (in future). Sri Lanka is not a military power. What we do will not harm the security of India. The Indo-Sri Lanka Agreement of 1987 put bilateral relations on an even keel and dealt with the (ethnic) problem in Sri Lanka and the strains in bilateral ties (at the time)." He said he had "not heard of" the new possibility that the U.S. might, in the present post-Kissinger era, try to co-opt India for the strategic development of Sri Lanka's Trincomalee port in pursuit of a policy of containment of China. Trincomalee, close to India's coastline, is sometimes seen here as an alternative to the Subic Bay, which the U.S. vacated a few years ago, and Dr. Henry Kissinger had co-opted Pakistan over a quarter century ago in securing for America a strategic passage to China. In contrast now, "the U.S. and China will carry on their love-hate relations but will not have a complete break. Moreover, Sri Lanka will be looking at Trincomalee in terms only of its commercial possibilities," Mr. Wickremesinghe said. All the same, any settlement of the ethnic crisis that Sri Lanka might now be able to achieve, with or without facilitation by an external power, must be acceptable to India, he noted.

On February 14, 1998, India and Sri Lanka signaled a new sense of urgency in their complementary approaches to economic diplomacy by exchanging the instruments of ratification of their bilateral Agreement for the Promotion and Protection of Investment. The instruments were exchanged in Delhi by the Sri Lankan Foreign Secretary, Mr. Wilhelm Woutersz, and India's High Commissioner to Sri Lanka, Mr. Shiv Shankar Menon. The establishment of a legal framework for giving a thrust to direct foreign investment in either direction is said to be the bedrock of the bilateral accord, whose ratification instruments brought it into force with effect from today. No follow-up details were announced by either side. Placing India-Sri Lanka ties in a perspective, Mr. Kadirgamar had said: "I don't think it is a relationship that we will need to make a constant sort of renewal or fanfare about." He indicated, too, that India had not raised with Sri Lanka at this time any questions relating to New Delhi's strategic concerns (if any) regarding official Colombo's move at this juncture to consider an agreement with an American firm for phosphate mining in the strategic Trincomalee region of Sri Lanka.

On June 1, 1999, with the historic Indo-Sri Lanka Free Trade Agreement (FTA) signed towards the end of 1998 for bilateral trade expansion remaining in limbo, India has offered to reactivate the treaty in a bid to enable Sri Lanka to seize the initiative. Under this agreement, India offered zero duty on around 1,000 items with 50 per cent margin of preference upon coming into force of the Agreement on all items except for those in the negative list numbering some 420 tariff lines. However, tariffs would be brought down to zero level over a span of three years. Sri Lanka has in turn reciprocated by announcing zero duty on around 900 items with 50 per cent margin of preference for around 600 items upon coming into force. While India would complete the process of tariff elimination within a period of three years, Sri Lanka would achieve the same within eight years. The phase-out would be restricted to basic customs duty and not on additional customs duty in lieu of Central excise and special additional duty, which provides enough protection to the domestic industry. However, when the treaty was formally signed last year end, there were protestations within the country particularly from manufacturers of tea, rubber and garments that duty-free import from Sri Lanka of these items would imperil the very survival of small-scale growers and manufacturers in India. The Government of India made it amply clear that duty-free import of tea is not contemplated under the FTA. It was further contended that there is little likelihood that tea imported from Sri Lanka would find its way for exports under rupee debt trade mechanism, as there is a minimum value addition norm of 35 per cent for export of imported goods against payment in Indian rupees. However, in the past several weeks pressures were building within Sri Lanka trade and industry for operationalizing the provisions of the FTA which Sri Lanka hoped would work to its advantage even as Indian manufacturers of tea, rubber and garments voiced their apprehensions over cheap imports of these items flooding into India.

The India-Sri Lanka free trade agreement (FTA), which has come into effect from March 1, 2000, is an opportunity for both countries to protect and improve their position in international trade, according to the Board of Investment (BOI) in Sri Lanka. It was with this perspective that the BOI sponsored a delegation of Sri Lankan businessmen from select sectors to India, including Chennai, in late April, to lose no time in creating "win-win" situations for both countries. The agreement seeks to combine the strengths of India including its wide manufacturing and technological base and "market clout" and Sri Lanka's strengths such as strategic location on international sea-lanes, developed shipping, road and other infrastructure and high levels of literacy. "South India in particular should look seriously at possibilities of taking advantage of the FTA in view of greater proximity", said Mr. Edmond Jayasinghe, Senior Advisor, and Dr. Nihal Samarapulli, Director (Research), of the BOI. They pointed out that not only India and Sri Lanka but other countries of the SAARC (South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation) as well face the prospect of being "marginalized" in international trade, with several developing countries elsewhere becoming or continuing to be members of one regional free trade agreement or another featuring large markets. For instance, Kenyan tea will have concessional access to the Egyptian market under an African trade agreement. Garments from several developing countries have concessional access to big markets like the European Union and the U.S. through the Lome Convention or NAFTA (in the case of Mexico as a producer). Implementation of the India-Sri Lanka agreement will help reduce the cost of production of several items for units located in either country, and access to the large Indian market or third country markets on a competitive basis. Though the SAARC Free Trade Agreement (SAFTA) could not make much headway because of the negative attitude of Pakistan, "as far as we (Sri Lanka) are concerned, India, being the biggest as also the closest market in the region, the India-Sri Lanka agreement is as good as SAFTA", the BOI executives said. Sri Lanka, which had opted for economic liberalization much earlier than India, has in general lower levels of duty, while its domestic levies include a GST of 12.5 per cent and a defense levy of 5.5 per cent.

On June 12, 2000, the Indian foreign minister Jaswant Singh Monday indicated that India would provide humanitarian aid to Sri Lanka, but would not extend any military assistance. Concluding his two day visit, Singh reportedly told a select group of journalists that his visit was aimed at informing Sri Lankan President Chandrika Kumaratunga that India supported Sri Lanka's unity, integrity and sovereignty. He said he would like to see an early resolution to the nearly 20-year ethnic conflict and said he hoped that the political aspirations of all communities would be addressed. Singh expressed India's concern over the hostilities in Sri Lanka's north and the displacement of civilians, many of who have fled to the southern Indian state of Tamil Nadu. The Indian foreign minister arrived in Colombo Sunday amid reports that he had come to calm tempers in Sri Lanka over comments made by a member of India's ruling coalition who suggested that Sri Lanka be divided along the lines of the former Czechoslovakia. Singh also met the Foreign Minister Lakshman Kadirgamar, leader of opposition Ranil Wickremesinghe and leaders of Tamil political parties. He said he hoped that all parties in Sri Lanka conclude peace with unanimity. "Greater the unanimity, better it is for Sri Lanka," he was quoted as saying. A joint statement issued by the Sri Lankan and Indian foreign ministries said that India has offered wheat, rice and sugar on a counter-trade basis. It has extended a credit facility of $100 million to Sri Lanka. The terms of the credit would be mutually worked out between the finance ministries of the two countries. ''The discussions had been productive,'' the statement said. Tamil political leaders urged Singh for a greater Indian role in the conflict. Singh reiterated India's policy of non-intervention in Sri Lanka and told them that New Delhi would help only if the government of Sri Lanka and other parties to the conflict requested its assistance. In 1987, India sent peacekeepers to Sri Lanka, but ended up fighting the Tamil Tiger rebels. India lost nearly 1,200 soldiers in Sri Lanka's northern Jaffna peninsula before it withdrew the troops in 1990. Since then, India has adopted a policy of non-intervention in Sri Lanka. In May 2000, India refused to provide military assistance or even sell weapons to Sri Lanka who had 37,000 troops caught in a fierce battle with the guerrillas in the north.

Promising the end of his nation's civil war, Sri Lanka's prime minister arrived in India on December 22, 2001, in a bid to seek greater Indian involvement in the peace process. The government of newly-appointed Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe agreed Friday to a month-long cease-fire with Tamil Tiger rebels that it has renewed hopes of an end to Sri Lanka's 18-year insurgency. "There is going to be peace in the island and all of us in Sri Lanka have to work hard," Wickremesinghe was quoted as saying by Press Trust of India in the southern Indian city of Madras during a stopover. Hours later, he arrived in New Delhi, the Indian capital, on his three-day state visit. During his first overseas tour since assuming office this month, Wickremesinghe will meet India's President K. R. Narayanan and Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee. Wickremesinghe is accompanied by Foreign Minister Tyronne Fernando and a team of top officials and will also hold talks with Jaswant Singh, the foreign minister, Sonia Gandhi, the opposition leader, and several lawmakers. Rebels of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam have been fighting since 1983 to divide Sri Lanka on ethnic lines, saying an independent homeland is the only answer to discrimination against Tamils by majority Sinhalese. The war has killed more than 64,000 people. "We want the Indians to get more involved in bringing about a settlement to the ethnic crisis," Fernando, the foreign minister told The Associated Press in an interview in Colombo this week. India is not directly involved in Sri Lanka's ethnic conflict, but the south Indian state of Tamil Nadu is home to 56 million Tamils who have traditional ties with Sri Lanka's 3.2 million Tamils. The Tamil issue in Sri Lanka often spills over to Tamil Nadu's domestic politics. In 1987, India sent a peacekeeping force of 50,000 soldiers to Sri Lanka to fight the guerillas, but the troops were withdrawn in 1990 after 1,200 Indian soldiers were killed and thousands of others wounded or maimed. A year later, in May 1991, former Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated by a Tamil suicide bomber during an election rally in southern India, in what is believed to be a revenge attack. New Delhi has since kept out of Sri Lanka's internal affairs. Wickremesinghe has promised talks with the rebels, who are considered terrorists by Sri Lanka, India, the United States, Canada, Britain and Australia. His peace moves has been welcomed by many countries, including Britain. Moderate Tamils in Sri Lanka also welcomed the step. "We feel the cease-fire paves the way for a conducive climate in the north east and also for the resolution of the conflict," said Joseph Pararajasingham of the Tamil United Liberation Front. Wickremesinghe's United National Front government is seen as more acceptable to the rebels than the previous government, which had moved toward an all-out military offensive against the rebels.

Sri Lanka and India will discuss plans to boost trade when their leaders meet next week in the Indian capital, India's foreign minister said on October 15, 2003. Sri Lankan Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe will leave for New Delhi for a two-day trip aimed at finalizing the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement, or CEPA, to promote services and investment between the neighboring countries. "We are working on this together. The two prime ministers will discuss the proposed agreement very soon," Indian Foreign Minister Yashwant Sinha told reporters during a visit to the Sri Lankan capital. The CEPA "would take the two countries to a new level of engagement by intensifying and deepening bilateral interaction," said a joint statement following a bilateral trade meeting on cooperation in agriculture, power, transport and information technology. India and Sri Lanka have already signed a free-trade agreement, which Sinha said has helped to reduce Sri Lanka's trade deficit with India. CEPA would help the countries boost trade in services and encourage investment, which are excluded under the pact. The two countries also signed an agreement Wednesday to release US$30 million from a US$100 million loan from India. A US$45 million line of credit was released when the agreement was signed in 2001. India has been the island's biggest source of trade and investment since the Sri Lankan government signed a cease-fire with Tamil Tiger rebels in February 2002, halting 19 years of civil war. Sri Lanka's exports to India rose to US$171 million last year, up from US$72 million in 2001, while India's exports to Sri Lanka rose to US$835 million in 2002, up from US$602 million in 2001. Efforts to forge a permanent peace have stalled, however, and Sinha was to have talks with President Chandrika Kumaratunga and Wickremesinghe later Wednesday on the island's peace process. Meanwhile, Sinha said India firmly supported the peace process, and didn't feel the stalled peace talks stood in the way of lasting peace. "There has been a gap between the sixth and the seventh rounds. It is understandable," he said. "Two months or three months delay is not something that we will regard as a breakdown in the peace process."

On October 19, 2004, a high-level Indian defense team in Sri Lanka completed a draft agreement with the government that would let India provide training and arms to Sri Lanka's military, officials said. The deal would include military training, intelligence exchanges and maritime surveillance to prevent illegal activities, said Sri Lanka's defense secretary, Ciril Herath, after the meeting. "Both official delegations agreed on the draft of the agreement," Herath said. "It will now be submitted to both governments for approval." Herath declined to say when the pact would be signed, but other senior defense officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, suggested it could be done in the next few weeks. India would likely supply Sri Lanka with helicopters, artillery, patrol vessels and jeeps, the officials said. President Chandrika Kumaratunga is scheduled to make an official visit to India in early November. India's army chief is expected in Sri Lanka on November 1, 2004 for a four-day official visit. Leaders from the neighboring countries agreed a year ago to start talks on the defense deal. No immediate reaction was available from the Tamil Tigers rebels on the proposed defense pact, but the guerrillas warned earlier this year it could damage the already fragile truce between them and Sri Lanka's government. A Norway-brokered cease-fire halted fighting in February 2002, but peace talks have been stalled by disagreements since April 2003.

Indian Foreign Secretary Shyam Saran discussed security, post-tsunami reconstruction and other bilateral issues in a meeting on May 2, 2005, with his Sri Lankan counterpart, officials said. "They discussed a wide range of bilateral issues including economic, political and defense matters," Sri Lankan Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Himalee Arunatillaka said of the talks between Saran and Sri Lankan Foreign Secretary H.M.G.S. Palihakkara. The Indian High Commission said Saran and Palihakkara discussed Indian help for areas damaged by the Dec. 26 tsunami. India will fund two hospital projects in Sri Lanka, where more than 31,000 people were killed by the disaster, it said. The two officials also discussed defense issues, it said. Ties are strong between Sri Lanka and India. India's southern Tamil Nadu state is home to 56 million Tamils, who have traditional ties with Sri Lanka's 3.2 million Tamil minority. India's relations with Sri Lanka's Tamil rebels deteriorated after New Delhi was forced to withdraw peacekeeping forces from Tamil-majority areas of Sri Lanka in 1990, three years after it sent soldiers to implement a New Delhi-brokered peace accord. The rebels first cooperated, then turned their guns on the Indians, killing 1,200 soldiers. Two years later, a rebel suicide bomber killed former Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi. Since then, India has taken a hands-off approach to its southern neighbor. Sri Lanka's government and Tamil rebels are observing a cease-fire signed in February 2002, but peace talks have been stalled by rebel demands for wide autonomy in the Tamil-majority north and east. India supports the Norwegian-brokered peace process. However, it continues to list the rebels as terrorists, like the United States.

The Indian External Affairs Minister Shri K. Natwar Singh is visiting Sri Lanka on June 9-11, 2005. He will, during his visit, co-chair, along with the Foreign Minister of Sri Lanka, the Sixth meeting of the India-Sri Lanka Joint Commission. He will also take this opportunity to interact with the Sri Lankan leadership including Their Excellencies the President and Prime Minister of Sri Lanka and leaders of other political parties. India-Sri Lanka relations have seen significant progress since the last meeting of the Joint Commission in 2003. Political relations are close, trade and investments have increased, infrastructural linkages are expanding, defense cooperation is under discussion and there is a general, broad-based improvement across all sectors of bilateral cooperation. There has been traditional convergence of views between the two countries on a range of international issues including their deep commitment to oppose terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. They agree on the need for urgent reform of the UN system to meet global challenges, including the expansion of both permanent and non-permanent membership of the Security Council. Sri Lanka has endorsed India's candidature for the permanent membership of the UNSC. The dynamism of the economic relationship is manifest in the success of the India-Sri Lanka Free Trade Agreement. Bilateral trade has more than doubled after the FTA was signed and exceeded US$ 1.8 billion in 2003-04. India was the largest investor in Sri Lanka in 2002 and 2003. India has a substantial development partnership with Sri Lanka. It has committed a total of US$ 381 million as credit lines to Sri Lanka for financing a variety of activities that are of economic importance to Sri Lanka.

Sri Lanka, which is currently negotiating a Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement with India, today said it would increase its exports to the subcontinent as part of enhancing bilateral trade relations with New Delhi. "For economic partnership to revel, there should be balance of trade between India and Sri Lanka, for which Sri Lanka has to export more," Sri Lankan Prime Minister Mahindra Rajapakse said at the 'Made in India' Show organized by Confederation of India Industries at Colombo on September 23, 2005. The country's economy would be integrated with the Indian economy, which could happen by bringing in more business from India, he said, adding India was an excellent economic model for his country to follow. India's high commissioner Nirupama Rao also stressed on closer ties with the island nation, a CII statement here said. The industry body said the two governments should expedite the ongoing negotiations for the Indo-Sri Lanka Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA). The early implementation of CEPA would enable both countries to reap the benefits of free trade in goods and services, expansion of investment and enhanced economic cooperation, CII delegation leader V Srinivasan said.

Mahinda Rajapaksa, President of Sri Lanka, and Shiranthi Rajapaksa paid a state visit to India from December 27-30, 2005, at the invitation of the President of India, A.P.J. Abdul Kalam. The President of Sri Lanka was accompanied by Mangala Samaraweera, Minister of Foreign Affairs, A.H.M. Fowzie, Minister of Railways, Transport and Petroleum and Petroleum Resources Development, Jeyaraj Fernandopulle, Minister of Trade, Commerce, Consumer Affairs and Marketing Development, Ferial Ashraff, Minister of Housing and Construction, R. Bogollagama, Minister of Enterprise Development and Investment Promotion, Ministers, leaders of political parties and senior officials. President Rajapaksa held wide-ranging discussions with President Kalam, Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh, Home Minister Shivraj Patil, Commerce Minister Kamal Nath and Shipping Minister T.R. Baalu and other dignitaries. It was noted with satisfaction that Indo-Lanka bilateral relations have continued to be in a state of excellence characterized by political consensus in both countries, understanding, friendship, cooperation and mutual respect and benefit. The two sides reaffirmed their resolve to further consolidate and build on this strong and dynamic relationship. The discussions on international issues reflected the long-standing consonance of views between the two friendly nations. Both sides remain resolutely committed to opposing terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, while reiterating that terrorism can never be justified, either on political, or on religious, or on ideological grounds. The two sides agreed that the current global challenges require the reinvigoration of multilateralism, including through the strengthening of the UN system. In this context, Sri Lanka reiterated her position that the UN Security Council reform process should facilitate India's legitimate claim for a permanent seat in the UN Security Council and reaffirmed her support for the candidature of India as a permanent member of the UN Security Council. India and Sri Lanka emphasized their commitment to work for the full realization of the objectives identified by the 13th SAARC Summit in Dhaka last November. They were of the view that the South Asian Free Trade Agreement once operationalized should pave the way for the SAARC nations to move towards even closer economic cooperation, with the eventual goal being that of an economic union encompassing the entire region.

PS-SOURCES: New York Times May 18, 1952, July 17, 1953, October 11, 1954, December 27, 1957, December 30, 1960, December 13, 1962, October 30, 1964, United Press International June 12, 2000, The Hindu October 13, 1997, February 14, 1998, June 2, 1999, May 3, 2000, Associated Press August 2, 1983, December 22, 2001, October 15, 2003, October 19, 2004, May 2, 2005, Asia Pulse September 23, 2005, Indo-Asian News Service December 30, 2005, Hindustan Times June 9, 2005, Xinhua July 2, 1978, November 1, 1978, July 22, 1983, July 28, 1983, June 1, 1984, May 20, 1990, New York Times July 1, 1984, June 19, 1995, BBC April 25, 1994

MARITIME-MIDS: 

MID3037 not considered maritime MID 

MARITIME-LAST-CHECKED: 20141229 

MARITIME-DISPUTE: MID3037
 DYAD: INDIA SRI LANKA 750780
 DATES: 19841217 19850125
 HOSTILITYA: 4 FATALITYA: 0
 HOSTILITYB: 4 FATALITYB: 0

Discussion:
MID3037 occurred from December 1984 through January of 1985. Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi of India accused Sri Lanka of "indiscriminate killing" in the Tamil separatist dispute on December 11, 1984. The Sri Lankan government responded to Gandhi's statement on December 15, 1984, suggesting, "the government of India is one obstruction that stands in our way of finding a peaceful solution to this internal problem of ours." Two Indian fishermen were killed by Sri Lankan naval forces on January 7, 1985. An Indian coastguard ship in Indian territorial waters seized a Sri Lankan naval patrol boat on January 11, 1985, but the boat and seven-member crew were released on January 24, 1985. The Sri Lankan government accused India on January 29, 1985 of providing military assistance (training and weapons) to the Tamil rebels. Two Indian fishermen were killed by Sri Lankan naval forces on February 13, 1985. An Indian fishing boat was attacked inside Indian territorial waters by Sri Lankan naval forces on August 24, 1985.

SOURCES: Gibler, D.M. 2018. Militarized Interstate Dispute Narratives, 1816-2010. Langham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. 

Gibler, D. M., S. V. Miller, and E. K. Little. 2016. "An Analysis of the Militarized Interstate Dispute (MID) Dataset, 1816-2001." International Studies Quarterly. 60 (4): 719-730.
