FILE: cm750790v11.0.txt
DYAD: INDIA-NEPAL
RIVALRY: RIV1343
DISPUTE(S): MID1466 MID1463 MID1462 MID1449 

RIVNOTES: 

PS: 19470815-19620331 0.5 19620401-19710812 0.00 19710813-20209999 0.25

PS-UPDATE2020:border dispute remains unresolved and tensions increase when in November 2019: India asserted control over the Kalapani-Lipulekh-Limpiyadhura region of Pithoragarh (Uttrakhand) which is claimed by Nepal (https://www.brookings.edu/blog/up-front/2020/06/11/interpreting-the-india-nepal-border-dispute/) 	“The border dispute between India and Nepal had come to the fore in November 2019 when India published its new map following the bifurcation of Jammu and Kashmir into two Union Territories and the end of its special status under Article 370. The map showed Kalapani as a part of Uttrakhand State. Susta area in Bihar is another disputed area between the countries.” (https://www.drishtiias.com/daily-updates/daily-news-analysis/boundary-working-group-india-nepal )

PSNOTES: Coded as a lesser rivalry for the last period because both countries have yet to ratify outstanding boundary disputes. While they have taken some steps towards demarcation of Indian-Nepal boundary, both countries have failed to ratify the maps from Joint Technical Level Nepal-India Boundary Committee.

PS-LAST-CHANGED: 20220324
PS-LAST-CHECKED: 20220324

Territorial-Maritime-Boundary Issues Variables

MID1466 

TERRMID: MID1466 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID1466 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID1466 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID1466 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID1466 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID1466 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID1466 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID1466 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID1466 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID1466 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID1466 from Gibler 2018, in 1962 Nepal raided Indian villages across the border in search of rebels. India responded by strengthening their border outposts and arrested a Nepalese officer. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to militarized rebels in India. 

CIVWARLINK: MID1466 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID1466 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID1466 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID1466 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID1466 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID1466 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID1463 

TERRMID: MID1463 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID1463 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID1463 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID1463 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID1463 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID1463 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID1463 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID1463 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID1463 3 -- not civil war
CIVWARMID-CER: MID1463 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID1463 from Gibler 2018 and cm narrative, in 1965 Indian police chased a suspected assassin of a Punjab political leader into Nepal, and the Nepalese detained the policemen until they could verify that they were indeed Indian officials. Coded not civil war because the assassin was not a member of a militarized rebel group. There is no indication in cm narrative, Gibler 2018, or news coverage of this MID that the assassin was a member of a rebel group or that any rebels were involved. 

CIVWARLINK: MID1463 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID1463 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID1463 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID1463 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID1463 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID1463 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID1462 

TERRMID: MID1462 1 -- territorial MID
TERRMID-CER: MID1462 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: MID1462 from cm narrative and Gibler 2018, an inland river boundary between India and Nepal changed course, giving rise to a border dispute when India and Nepal disagreed on the new border. India and Nepal arrested several citizens in the disputed area. Coded territorial MID because this was connected to a territorial dispute. 

TERRLINK: MID1462 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID1462 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID1462 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID1462 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID1462 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID1462 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID1462 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID1462 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID1462 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID1462 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID1462 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID1462 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID1462 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID1462 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID4563 

TERRMID: MID4563 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID4563 1 -- certain 
TERRMID-NOTES: 

TERRLINK: MID4563 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID4563 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID4563 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID4563 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID4563 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID4563 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID4563 1 -- civil war MID
CIVWARMID-CER: MID4563 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES: MID4563 from Gibler 2018, in 2004-2005 Nepalese officers crossed the border into India in pursuit of militarized rebels. India arrested the officers. Coded civil war MID because this was connected to militarized rebels in Nepal crossing into India. 

CIVWARLINK: MID4563 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID4563 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID4563 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID4563 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID4563 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID4563 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID1449 

TERRMID: MID1449 3 -- not territory 
TERRMID-CER: MID1449 3 -- uncertain 
TERRMID-NOTES: MID1449 from Gibler, Miller, and Little 2016, India had military liaisons and other personnel staffed at border posts with Nepal, and Nepal demanded their withdrawal. India threatened to close the border in response. Coded not territory because the two were not disputing a territorial boundary (Huth and Allee 2002), and coded uncertain because GML recommend this case be dropped as the events do not constitute a MID. India's border closure threat was economic, not military. 

TERRLINK: MID1449 3 -- not third party link to territory 
TERRLINK-CER: MID1449 1 -- certain 
TERRLINK-NOTES: 

MARITMID: MID1449 3 -- not maritime 
MARITMID-CER: MID1449 1 -- certain 
MARITMID-NOTES: 

ISLMID: MID1449 3 -- not islands 
ISLMID-CER: MID1449 1 -- certain 
ISLMID-NOTES: 

CIVWARMID: MID1449 3 -- not civil war 
CIVWARMID-CER: MID1449 1 -- certain 
CIVWARMID-NOTES:

CIVWARLINK: MID1449 3 -- not civil war link 
CIVWARLINK-CER: MID1449 1 -- certain 
CIVWARLINK-NOTES: 

COUPMID: MID1449 3 -- not coup 
COUPMID-CER: MID1449 1 -- certain 
COUPMID-NOTES: 

COUPLINK: MID1449 3 -- not coup link
COUPLINK-CER: MID1449 1 -- certain 
COUPLINK-NOTES: 

MID4 2002-2010:

MID4563
rivalry=750790 nationa=NEPAL nationb=INDIA MID4563 20040924-20050903 
 revtype1a=NOT APPLICABLE revtype2a=NOT APPLICABLE fatala=NONE fatalpa=0 lhosta=DISPLAY OF FORCE 
 revtype1b=POLICY revtype2b=NOT APPLICABLE fatalb=NONE fatalpb=0 lhostb=
USE OF FORCE 

Three Nepalese security officers crossed the Indian border in pursuit of Nepalese rebels and were subsequently arrested by Indian authorities. First day of dispute was on 9/24/2004 and last day of dispute was on 9/3/2005.

NARRATIVE-CM:
Indian and Nepalese representatives signed the *Indo-Nepalese Treaty of Peace and friendship on July 31, 1950. Nepalese policemen entered the Indian border town of Raxaul on September 29, 1962, resulting in the wounding of four Indian policemen. The Chinese foreign minister expressed support for Nepal on October 5, 1962. On July 26, 1967, the Indian government formally protested against anti-India demonstrations by ethnic-Chinese in Kathmandu on June 24-25, 1967. Indian police arrested four Nepalese near the border in November 1968. India release the four Nepalese on December 18, 1968. India and Nepal agreed to establish a border demarcation commission in May 1969. Prime Minister Narasimha Rao of India and Prime Minister Girija Prasad Koirala of Nepal held negotiations in Kathmandu on October 19-21, 1992. India and Nepal reached an agreement in New Delhi on January 29, 1996, which provided for joint development of the Mahakali River basin. Nepal and India formally signed the Mahakali River agreement in New Delhi on February 12, 1996. Foreign Minister Kamal Thapa of Nepal demanded that Indian troops withdraw from the disputed area of Kalapani in western Nepal on September 15, 1997.

SOURCES-CM: 
*Agence France-Presse *(AFP), September 15, 1997; Dharamdasani 1976; Dutt, 1984, 184-207; *Keesing,* January 26-February 2, 1963, October 1992; *PTI News Agency* (New Delhi), January 29, 1996; *Reuters*, April 9, 1998.

NARRATIVE-CR:
The rivalry between India and Nepal is about India's involvement in Nepal's internal politics and a general threat to Nepalese sovereignty. According to India, South Asia constitutes an integral security unit in which India plays the lead role. Many Nepalese resent this interpretation and accuse India of being insensitive to Nepal's status as an independent nation. New Delhi insists that stable, independent neighbors are vital to India's security. However, many Nepalese regard India as a regional bully. Because of these attitudes relations between India and Nepal have oscillated over the years. 

In 1950 China forcibly annexed Tibet, which New Delhi regarded as a buffer zone shielding the subcontinent from potential Chinese incursions. Nepal thus came to play a much larger role in Indian security. Fearing that China might eventually subvert or invade Nepal, India signed a Treaty of Peace and Friendship with the Nepalese Rana regime in 1950. In a private exchange of letters between the leaders, Nepal was included in India's defense perimeter. The treaty called for both parties to consult and devise effective countermeasures in the event of a security threat to either country. To assuage Nepalese fears of Indian domination the treaty included a clause stipulating that Indian troops could only enter Nepal at the invitation of Nepal. 

In 1952, the Indian Military mission arrived in Katmandu to reorganize Nepal's armed forces to bring the kingdom's military in line with the security requirements of India. Many Nepalese military officers and civil servants were outraged by India's actions that they saw as an insult to national self respect.

In December of 1960, King Mahendra of Nepal dissolved the country's first democratically elected government. Nepalese rebels led by General Subarna began a guerrilla campaign in an effort to restore democratic government. The rebellion spread to areas bordering with India, and Nepal accused India of organizing the rebellion.

The conflict escalated after Nepal made several agreements with China, including the building of a road from Nepal to Tibet. This threatened India, as Chinese troops could be supplied all the way to the Indian border. At the time, India was also involved in a dispute with China over their common border. By June of 1962 the rebellion had become a full-scale uprising, and there were a number of border incidents as Nepalese troops pursued rebels into Indian Territory. 

It is in this context that in April of 1962 MID1466 begins. Here India supported exiles of the Nepali Congress and sympathetic rebels. Based in India, these rebels made incursions and raids into Nepal from April until October of 1962. Events in Nepal were overtaken by the Sino-Indian war and the conflict lapsed. In the aftermath, India left troops position in Nepal at the Nepal/China border and in Katmandu. 

From December 1 through 3 1965 MID1463 or the Sucha Singh case occurs. Here Indian police pursue a suspected assassin named Sucha Singh several miles into Nepal. The Royal Army of Nepal pursues the Indian police and engages in a three day, peacefully settled standoff. 

From October until December 1968 MID1462 or the Susta Border dispute occurs. Here serious tension arose due to the shifting course of the Gandak River that forms the boundary in the Susta region on the Nepal Bihar border. An Indian official arrested four Nepalese citizens for trespassing. The Nepalese protested arguing the territory was Nepalese. This issue may have been used by Nepal to gain leverage and concessions in the Trade and Transit Treaty re-negotiations taking place at the time. 

From June through September 1969 MID1449 occurs. Here tension increase as Nepal protests the continued presence of Indian troops at check posts on the Nepal China border and with the presence of Indian troops in Katmandu. India stiffly responded noting the importance of Nepal in ensuring Indian security from the Chinese threat. 

In September of 1969, bilateral negotiations were held between Nepal and an Indian delegation in New Delhi. Here the two states affirmed their interest in cooperative relations between the two states in a joint statement. Because of these talks, troops withdrew from the check posts and from Katmandu by 1970. As a concession, Nepal agreed to allow the stationing of some military personnel at the Indian embassy in Katmandu. 

This treaty marks the end of the militarized disputes between the two states until 2003, however relations between the two states have not remained on a constant path of improvement. 

Concurrent to the bilateral negotiations there was a domestic political struggle taking place within India. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi was in a struggle with a group of bosses known as the Syndicate, who assumed control of her party, Congress, after the death of her father Nehru in 1964. The conflict was ideological as she criticized the Syndicate for being excessively conservative and betraying Congress' socialist principles. The struggle came to a head over the choice of a new president of India. The Syndicate designated the conservative speaker of the Lok Sabha (India's House of the People in Parliament) as Congress' presidential candidate. Gandhi dismissed conservative cabinet Finance Minister Desai and ordered the nationalization of India's 14 largest banks. In August of 1969 she succeeded in having her candidate for president elected. In November of 1969 the Syndicate struck back expelling Gandhi from the party and ordering parliamentary Congress to choose a new Prime Minister. Instead Lok Sabha Congress Members supported her and the party split into two factions supporting the Syndicate and PM Gandhi. 

On January 9, 1971, a dispute over a trade and transit treaty was eroding the Nepalese-Indian relations. Nepalese officials accused India of an economic blockade. Indian officials accuse Nepalese traders of smuggling out Indian goods such as jute that earns hard-currency and smuggling in banned luxury items. 
Relations did improve with the signing of the Treaty of Trade and Transit (updating the earlier version of 1960) in 1971. However, in 1975 Nepalese King Birendra proposed that Nepal be recognized internationally as a Zone of Peace where military competition would be off limits. In Birendra's view this symbolized Nepal's desire to maintain cordial relations with both China and India. India felt this was a threat to its security ad could not endorse the proposal. 

In 1988 Indian Nepalese relations underwent a major jolt. In June of that year, Birendra concluded a secret arms deal with China in which China would supply obsolete air defense weapons to Nepal at deep discounts. India learned of the deal quickly and felt a significant threat from the sale. India felt that it could not allow the sale to take place feeling that it would set a dangerous precedent. India mounted complaints regarding Nepal's insensitivity to India's vital interests. Birendra was intransigent and insisted that Nepal had the sovereign right to determine its own defense requirements. 

In March of 1989, the Nepal-India Trade and Transit agreement came up for renewal. India's Prime Minister Rajiv Ghandhi refused to extend the agreement unless Nepal agreed to meet India's commercial and defense concerns and acquiesce to India's desires vis a vis China. Both sides refused to back down, the agreement lapsed and India closed 13 of the 15 border check posts through which Nepal's trade with the outside world flowed. This placed heavy economic pressure on Nepal and the international community placed heavy diplomatic pressure on both sides to get back to the bargaining table. 

This dispute emphasized the reality of the geopolitics of the region. Nepal did not have the military, diplomatic, or economic influence to withstand an Indian blockade. Many in Nepal regarded the blockade as punishment for Birendra's show of independence. 

The worsening economic conditions in Nepal initiated by the economic blockade led to agitations and protests by the Movement for the Restoration of Democracy. This resulted in a new constitution with a change in Nepal's political system, in which the king was forced to institute a parliamentary democracy. The new government sought quick restoration of amicable relations with India. In June of 1990, a joint Kathmandu-New Delhi statement was issued pending the finalization of a comprehensive arrangement covering all aspects of bilateral relations, restoring trade relations, reopening transit routes for Nepal's imports, and formalizing respect of each other's security concerns. Essentially, the statement announced the restoration of the status quo ante and the reopening of all border points, and Nepal agreed to various concessions regarding India's commercial privileges. Kathmandu also announced that lower cost was the decisive factor in its purchasing arms from China and that Nepal was advising China to withhold delivery of the last shipment. The statement declared that Kathmandu and New Delhi would cooperate in industrial development, in harnessing the waters of their common rivers for mutual benefit, and in protecting and managing the environment. Relations continued to improve significantly in 1991 when Nepal's democratically elected government assumed office. 

SOURCES-CR:
Clodfelter, 1997; Bercovitch and Jackson, 1997; Butterworth, 1976; Dhaaramdasani, 1976; Husain, 1979, Nyrop, 1985; Ramakant, 1976, Savada, 1993; Tillema, 1991

SB-CR:
India / Nepal Years: 1950-1988 (Censored) Issues at stake: India's security and influence over Nepal. Indian interference in Nepal's internal politics, trade, and security policy. End coding: continuing as of 1988. Number of militarized disputes: 6. Number of 30 day reciprocated militarized disputes: 1. Last militarized dispute: 1969. Wars: none. Summary: The rivalry centers around a refusal by India to recognize Nepal as a self-declared *zone of peace,* and around the continuing involvement of India in Nepali politics. In July, 1950, the two states signed treaties of "peace and friendship" and "trade and commerce." At that time, India declared Nepal to be vital to India's security. In late 1950 and 1951, India began to become involved in Nepalese internal politics, supporting first the rebel Nepali Congress forces in their efforts to overthrow the illiberal Rana regime, and then the exiled King of Nepal, who eventually gained power with the overthrow the Rana regime. Between 1951 and 1953, India sent troops into Nepal on three separate occasions, although all were supposedly at the request of Nepal's government. In 1960 the King of Nepal disbanded the Nepali Congress and denounced all opposition as anti-national, at which time the exiled Nepali Congress fled to India and began to organize raids on Nepal. India supported the rebels in their efforts, and in the fall of 1962 placed a small scale economic blockade on Nepal to force the king to liberalize his policies. However, by December 1962 India *advised* the rebels that all agitation in Nepal was to stop, and the rebel forces heeded this *advice.* It is thus somewhat unclear whether or not India had a consistent goal regarding the direction of Nepal's government during this time. A series of problems arose after this time. In 1963 a new dispute over borders arose between the two states, while in 1969 the states disputed the status of Indian military officials in Nepal. In 1970 a dispute over trading treaties and practices between the two states arose. The most recent issue to remain in contention arose in 1975 when King Birendra of Nepal called for the recognition of Nepal as a *Zone of Peace;* India refused to endorse this concept, considering its influence over Nepalese security policy to be of vital importance to its own security. India continued to support Nepalese opposition parties through the 1970s and 1980s, not by supplying arms, but by verbally pushing the Nepalese government to follow the liberal suggestions of the Nepali Congress party. The most recent tensions arose over a 1988 arms deal between Nepal and China, which was denounced by India as a violation of the 1950 India-Nepal agreements. Failed talks in 1989 led to India refusing to extend its trade and transit agreement with Nepal; 13 of the 15 border checkpoints between the states were closed, and Nepal suffered economically. Outside pressure forced the parties back to the table in 1990; as a result of talks the two states reaffirmed the 1950 treaties and Nepal stopped its last shipment of arms from China. However, Nepalese resentment of Indian dominance, Indian pressure on Nepalese politics, and India's refusal to recognize the *Zone of Peace* remain. Sources: Savada (1993), Rose (1971), Nyrop (1985).

PS-NARRATIVE:

19470815-19620331 0.5

India became independent on August 15, 1947. Nepal became a member of the international system on January 1, 1920. In July, 1950, the two states signed treaties of "peace and friendship" and "trade and commerce." At that time, India declared Nepal to be vital to India's security. In late 1950 and 1951, India began to become involved in Nepalese internal politics, supporting first the rebel Nepali Congress forces in their efforts to overthrow the illiberal Rana regime, and then the exiled King of Nepal, who eventually gained power with the overthrow the Rana regime. In 1950 China forcibly annexed Tibet, which New Delhi regarded as a buffer zone shielding the subcontinent from potential Chinese incursions. Nepal thus came to play a much larger role in Indian security. Fearing that China might eventually subvert or invade Nepal, India signed a Treaty of Peace and Friendship with the Nepalese Rana regime in 1950. In a private exchange of letters between the leaders, Nepal was included in India's defense perimeter. The treaty called for both parties to consult and devise effective countermeasures in the event of a security threat to either country. To assuage Nepalese fears of Indian domination the treaty included a clause stipulating that Indian troops could only enter Nepal at the invitation of Nepal. In 1952, the Indian Military mission arrived in Katmandu to reorganize Nepal's armed forces to bring the kingdom's military in line with the security requirements of India. Many Nepalese military officers and civil servants were outraged by India's actions that they saw as an insult to national self respect. Between 1951 and 1953, India sent troops into Nepal on three separate occasions, although all were supposedly at the request of Nepal's government. In 1960 the King of Nepal disbanded the Nepali Congress and denounced all opposition as anti-national, at which time the exiled Nepali Congress fled to India and began to organize raids on Nepal.

19710813-20159999 0.25

Relations did improve with the signing of the Treaty of Trade and Transit (updating the earlier version of 1960) on August 13, 1971. 

On August 20, 1973, it was announced that relations between Nepal and India have become strained in recent months. Nepal views India's involvement in the creation of Bangladesh and its take-over of Sikkim with distress. The recent coup in Afghanistan jolted the Nepalese Government and monarchy, stirring whispers of possible Soviet influence because India and USSR have close relationship. Several disgruntled and potentially powerful Nepalese politicians have been living in exile since King Mahendra, father of current King, Birendra, suspended parliamentary democracy in 1960. India is suspected of encouraging political dissent and spurring occasional border raids. The recent hijacking of a Royal Nepalese Airlines airliner by 3 students, who escaped across Indian border with $400,000 in Indian currency, and the border raid in which local official was shot dead by bandits who fled to India have upset the Nepalese Government. India has accused the Nepalese traders of smuggling. He has been uneasy about Nepal's friendship with China. The ties between Nepal and India are shaped by geography. About 90% of Nepal's trade is conducted with India. The Indian assistance to Nepal is largest of any nation, about $14-million a year.

The Indian Foreign Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee paid an official visit to Nepal from July 14 to 16, 1977, at the invitation of the Nepalese Foreign Minister Krishna Raj Arjal. During his stay here he was received by the Nepalese King Birendra. He also had wide ranging discussions on matters of mutual interest with his Nepalese counterpart and other ministers. A joint statement, issued on July 17, 1977, by the Nepalese Foreign Ministry at the end of Vajpayee's visit, said that the two sides discussed Nepal's proposals concerning the announcement of establishing Nepal as a zone of peace and these relating to the conclusion of a new trade and transit treaty. At a press conference prior to his departure for New Delhi, Vajapyee said that the government of India would give due consideration to Nepal's proposal concerning the zone of peace. He said he was neither in favor of nor opposed to the proposal.

Nepal and India signed two treaties, one on trade and the other on transit, in New Delhi On March 18, 1978, according to a report from the Indian capital. In the treaty of trade formulates, the government of India agreed to enlarge the scope of preferences for Nepalese manufactured products. The two governments also agreed to incorporate necessary arrangements to maintain supplies of essential commodities needed by each other. To promote mutual trade, preferential treatment would be accorded to primary products on a reciprocal basis. In the treaty of transit, India will provide facilities for the transit of Nepal's cargo. The governments of Nepal and India agreed through an exchange of letters that overland routes will be provided to Nepal for her trade with Bangladesh as also for Nepal's trade with third countries through Bangladesh.

Shri Badra Sharma, Nepalese Minister of State for Commerce and Industry, and Mohan Dharia, Indian Minister of Commerce, had talks in New Delhi on 19th January, 1979, in which India offered Nepal full co-operation in trade and industry.

Relations between the landlocked Himalayan kingdom of Nepal and its giant southern neighbor, India, are currently going through another rough patch over the issue of transit rights to the sea, it was announced on April 5, 1988. Negotiations to extend a ten-year-old bilateral treaty on trade and transit between the two South Asian nations are deadlocked, and the treaty ceased to be operative from March 25, 1988. Nepal is bound on three sides by India, and the Himalayan mountains form its border with China to the north. In 1978, Nepal and India agreed on a comprehensive treaty that covered both trade and transit. Nepal reasoned that trade was a bilateral affair, while transit to the sea was its right-hence two separate treaties for two different issues. That treaty was negotiated with the Janata Party government in New Delhi ten years ago, and drew flak from the opposition Congress-I Party which said the pact was weighted heavily against India. When the Congress-I under former Prime Minister Indira Gandhi came to power, it agreed to renew the agreement for five years-but only after long-drawn negotiations. One official in Kathmandu familiar with the talks told IPS that India was trying hard to find an excuse to retract some, if not all, the terms of the 1978 treaty. "Nepal is not landlocked. It is India-locked. India keeps on talking about national interest when all Nepal is asking for is a right granted by international law," the official said. The issue of dominance from the south is a sensitive one in a country which is already heavily dependent on India both for trade and aid. The previous week New Delhi announced that it had decided to extend the validity of the treaty until the end of May-giving time for more talks. A Nepali team plans to visit New Delhi later this month, but officials predict there is hard bargaining ahead. In addition to the question of transit rights, there is the problem of Nepal's looming trade deficit with India. In 1986 this deficit increased to $287 million, compared to $229 million in 1985, as imports of mainly manufactured goods far exceeded exports of mainly agricultural products. To correct this imbalance, Nepal wants a provision in the new treaty that would lift restrictions on its exports of industrial items. At present, Nepal is not allowed to export goods to India that have more than 20 percent of raw materials imported from Third World countries. Nepali officials want India to grant preferential treatment for Nepali imports with less than 60 percent indigenous raw materials. Nepal also wants more transit routes to the sea because of a greater diversification of its trade with overseas countries. At present, Nepal's exports are sea-freighted mainly from the port of Calcutta-where Nepali traders say there are long delays, negligence and vandalism. Nepal has also been using the port of Chittagong in Bangladesh. Nepal and Bangladesh are separated by a 12 mile strip of India and Nepal says it wants more entry points into Bangladesh. Nepal also wants additional safeguards in the transit treaty that would prevent incidents like the one last November when a Nepali airliner bound for Kathmandu from Hong Kong was seized at Calcutta airport and valuables confiscated from passengers. Prominent Nepalis say that instead of being magnanimous towards a poorer smaller neighbor, India's attitude towards Nepal is restrictive and "big brotherly." "India has followed a rather restrictive policy in actual practice with respect to the entry of Nepal's manufactures into the Indian market," says Rishikesh Shah, a prominent Nepali scholar and former foreign minister. Shah argues that Nepal's high cost economy is a result of its landlocked geography, and this makes its products more expensive than products of Indian manufacturers which have economies of scale on their side. Other economists say India is only interested in making Nepal an extension of its domestic market, and although joint venture projects have been discussed over the years, nothing has materialized. A United Nations-sponsored study showed there were 17 areas where joint Indo-Nepali investment in industries were feasible. Meanwhile, Indian business has been aggressively promoting its products in Nepal. Last month, Indian companies clinched $16 million worth of business during a 11-day trade fair in Kathmandu. Nepal's shopping list included automobiles, and equipment for printing and cement plants. Independent observers here say one reason why India hesitates to be liberal in its trade relations with Nepal is because of fears of Chinese inroads into the Himalayan kingdom. New Delhi has pressured Kathmandu to raise the duty on imports from China's Tibetan region from 100 percent to 335 percent because they feel the low tariff would allow cheap Chinese goods to enter the Indian market through the open Indo-Nepal border. This drew howls of protest from Nepali traders who accused India of "economic hegemonism," and said new duties on Chinese goods made it more difficult for Nepal to reduce its trade imbalance with India. Traders say the deficit could grow by more than 20 percent in the current fiscal year unless India took a more liberal attitude towards trade with Nepal. Nepal has tried to balance its economic dependence on India by going out of its way to foster economic and political ties with China.

Border traders resumed business with India on June 20, 1990, two days after Indian trucks carrying salt and sugar rolled into Nepal in a celebratory end to a 15-month dispute. The border activity is sparking hopes that Nepal's harsh economic deprivation is about to end. Still, businessmen and economists say it will take some time before prices in Nepal float down from a high reached when a diplomatic dispute led India to impose a partial economic blockade in March 1989. Nepal and India moved to end the dispute this month, and on Monday, India re-opened all the trade and transit points on its border with the landlocked Himalayan kingdom. Thousands of people yelling "Long live Nepali-Indian friendship!" cheered as the trucks moved into Rupaidiha, a border town 230 miles southwest of Katmandu. On Wednesday, border trade was flourishing at Rupaidiha, businessmen said. In March 1989, India closed 13 of the 15 entry points along the 1,093-mile border following the expiration of the two countries' trade and transit treaties. India also closed seven traditional border trading posts. The closures caused great hardship for Nepal, which depends on imports for essential day-to-day needs. The dispute concerned China's relations with Nepal. Problems began when Nepal bought a batch of Chinese arms in June 1988. The deal marked the first time Nepal had bought weapons from its northern neighbor, known for its aggressive arms sales policy. India alleged that the deal posed a security threat to New Delhi because India did not have good relations with Beijing. Before India closed the border points, hundreds of trucks entered Nepal from India every day. In all, Nepal imported about $$170 million worth of goods a year from India-30 percent to 35 percent of its total imports. Chief among the imports were essentials such as textiles, construction materials, sugar and salt. Tensions between the countries remained high through the beginning of 1990. But then Nepal's political scene met with a dramatic change. A massive pro-democracy movement that started in February forced King Birendra to lift a 29-year-old ban on political parties and agree to a multi-party political system. The king then appointed a caretaker government, led by the once-banned Nepali Congress party, to rule until national elections can be called. Nepali Congress has long had good relations with India, which it looks to as a model of democratic government. In his first foreign visit, Nepal's new prime minister, Krishna Prasad Bhattarai, journeyed to India where on June 10 the two countries agreed to restore normal trade relations. Nepal said it would defer any more Chinese arms shipments. Later, when Bhattarai returned to Nepal, the Chinese arms were delivered. Diplomatic sources said Nepal received the arms because they had already been purchased by the previous government. India reopened the border nearly two weeks before the scheduled date of July 1. Fourteen 14 trucks filled with Indian salt, sugar and cement entered Nepal during the inaugural ceremony at Rupaidiha. Business leaders expect more Indian goods will start flowing into Nepal within the next week, since negotiations for supplies are currently taking place between Indian and Nepalese traders. In addition, a delegation of the Nepal Oil Corp. has gone to Bombay, India to negotiate with the Indian Oil Corp. for the supply of petroleum products.

On February 12, 1996, India and the Himalayan kingdom of Nepal signed two agreements on sharing of water and power from a common river to mark a major breakthrough in their bilateral relations. The agreements were signed by Indian Prime Minister P.V. Narasimha Rao and his Nepalese counterpart, Sher Bahadur Deuba, hours after the Nepalese arrived in New Delhi to began an official six-day visit to India. Deuba is accompanied by five senior ministers and a delegation of industrialists and top civil servants. The agreement calls for the integrated development of the Mahakali River which forms Nepal's western border with India. Details of the deal, the Mahakali Pact, were worked out during a visit to Nepal last month by Indian Foreign Minister Pranab Mukerjee. Under it, Nepal and India have equal rights for use of the river. The pact is part of a treaty governing integrated development of the river. It includes a newly worked accord on the Tanakpur hydro-electric and irrigation project built by India on the Mahakali River. Part of the project covers Nepalese territory. The original Tanakpur Pact agreed on during a visit to India by former Nepalese Prime Minister Girija Prasad Koirala in late 1991 was generally opposed in Nepal as a "sell out". But India's attitude was said during Mukerjee's visit to Nepal to have changed. Nepal is hoping that this is a general change. Nepal is expecting a better deal from India on trade. It is confident that various non-tariff barriers erected to prevent Nepalese goods from reaching the vast Indian market will be lifted. According to officials, India will also be asked to lift-in the case of Nepal-the restrictions on foreign investment by Indian industrialists. The Nepalese prime minister has also said that he would seek the review of the 1950 Nepal-India treaty of peace and friendship which many Nepalese consider to be "unequal".

A crucial round of talks will be held in Kathmandu from July 2, 1997, between survey officials of Nepal and India to determine the status of Kalapani on Nepal's extreme North-West frontier. India has been in occupation of Kalapani since the Sino-India war of 1962 while Nepal claims that the area belongs to Nepal under a treaty signed in 1816. The Nepalese foreign minister told the last session of parliament that Nepal was trying to get back the territory. However, it was only during Indian Prime Minister Inder Kumar Gural's visit in early June to Kathmandu that both Nepal and India agreed to convene a meeting of survey officials in order to sort out the issue as early as possible. Nepal is learnt to have made available to India all documents including aerial photography to support its claim. India is also expected to furnish proof to support its claim. Under the 1816 treaty between Nepal and British India, all territories east of the Mahakali River belong to Nepal. The present dispute is over the origin of the Mahakali River. While Nepal claims that the source of the Mahakali River is further west from what India has projected, India says the origin of the river is a small river just east of Kalapani. Kalapani is a strategic point as it stands near the border with Tibet.

Expert-level talks between Nepal and India to resolve the dispute over strategic Kalapani on Nepal's far western frontier have ended in the Nepalese capital without any agreement, reports said on July 8, 1997. Nepal has been claiming that Kalapani almost on the tri-junction between Nepal, India and China, belongs to Nepal and that India has been illegally stationing its troops there since 1962 Sino-India war. The Nepal-India talks by survey officials were ordered by the prime ministers of the two countries during a visit in June to Nepal by Indian Prime Minister I.K. Gujral. But, according to newspaper reports, the Indian side "indulged in delaying tactics" after Nepal presented its case backed by maps dating back to 1856. According to the Nepali-language daily Kantipur, the Indians were "taken aback by the Nepalese proof" and as a result the meeting originally scheduled for four days dragged on to six days until Monday without any outcome. Nepal's border with India is determined by the 1816 Sugauli Treaty signed with British India after a protracted war. The Mahakali River forms Nepal's western border with India and the point of dispute has been the source of the river. India claims that the source is Limpiyadhura while Nepal asserts that Liphulekh in the west is the source. Though all Nepalese and Indian officials are tight lipped, the Nepali-language daily Himalayan Times quoted the Nepalese Foreign Secretary, Kumar Gyawali, as saying that there was no dispute about Mahakali being the border between the two countries but the source of the river was now in dispute. According to the Kantipur daily, at one point the Nepalese delegation threatened to break off talks as the Indian side was said to have shown "no desire" to talk about the Kalapani issue. The talks are now to be resumed in New Delhi within a month but few in Kathmandu expect India to concede that it has been illegally occupying Nepalese territory. Meanwhile, the Himalayan Times reported that India increased its troop strength in Kalapani in May while Nepal was busy with local elections.

On December 6, 1998, India and Nepal have failed to renew their transit treaty that allows Nepal to transport goods through India and use its ports, and have agreed to continue with the existing agreement for another month. The existing treaty, signed in 1991, expired on December 5, 1998. Nepal, surrounded on its east, south and west by India, is entirely dependent on India for its overseas trade ties. The two countries have now agreed to extend the existing arrangement for a month to allow time to sign a fresh treaty.

India has rejected Nepal's proposal to India to pull out its troops from the disputed Kalapani area on Nepal's far western border with India, media reports said on August 1, 2000. The mass circulation Nepali language daily "Kantipur" said in its report from New Delhi that the Indian Foreign Ministry has flatly rejected the proposal. The report comes as the Nepalese Prime Minister, Girija Prasad Koirala, begins a week-long official visit to India designed to improve the strained relations between two neighboring countries. Nepal had proposed that India pull out of the disputed area of Kalapani, located about 550 kilometres north west of the Nepalese capital, and that talks be started to settle the issue. Nepal says India had illegally occupied the strategic area that forms Nepal's tri-junction with India and China in 1962, soon after the India-China conflict broke out. Nepal contends that Kalapani is located east of the Mahakali River while India now says that it is located west of the river. Under the Sugauli Treaty Nepal signed with British India on 2nd of December 1815, the Mahakali River forms Nepal's western border with India. The Kantipur report says that the decision to withdraw Indian troops from Kalapni can now only be taken by the Indian Prime Minister, Atal Behari Vajpayee.

The Nepalese government issued a strong protest against comments made about the country by a senior member of India's ruling Hindu nationalist BJP party, on January 2, 2001. Local newspapers also criticized K.R. Malkani for his remarks while left-wing students burnt an effigy of him in Kathmandu. Deputy Prime Minister and Home Minister Ram Chandra Paudel told reporters that: "Nepal has lodged a strong protest to India through its Ambassador in India Bhek Bahadur Thapa against the remark." "We have sent a note to India through our Ambassador Thapa while we have also asked Indian Ambasssador to Nepal Deb Mukharji to clarify," Paudel said. Malkani, a former spokesman of Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee's BJP party, in an interview with the magazine India Today, said that New Delhi should have taken up a Nepalese offer of accession in the 1950s. "I think, we made a serious, very foolish mistake when (former Nepalese king) Tribhuvan offered to accede to India and (Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal) Nehru said-'No no, what will the world say?' `We should have accepted the accession of Nepal to India when it was offered to us by King Tribhuvan," he told the magazine. Malkani also denounced Nepal for allegedly harboring Pakistani spies. "Pakistan has any number of agents in Nepal. They spend a lot of money out there. When we had no diplomatic relations with Pakistan after the 1971 war, (former Pakistani prime minister Zulfiqar Ali) Bhutto especially sent a very influential powerful man to Nepal. He himself told me that Nepal is now very important for us as an entry point because from Nepal anybody can enter India-goods can come in, agents can come in, anybody can come in." India's foreign ministry, already facing anti-Indian protests in Nepal following alleged remarks by an Indian film star that he loathed Nepal, quickly distanced itself from Malkani's comments. "The remarks ... do not in any way reflect the views of the government of India," foreign ministry spokesman Raminder Singh Jassal told reporters. He added "India has longstanding, close and friendly relations with Nepal and the Nepalese people based on the fullest respect for each others' sovereignty and national aspirations'.

On March 22, 2002, the Prime Minister Sher Bahadur Deuba has said that all issues of concern to Nepal have been raised firmly with India. Prime Minister Deuba, who is on a goodwill official visit of India, made it clear in a brief interview to Nepal Television in New Delhi that foreign troops would not be brought into Nepal in connection with security. He said Nepal's views on Kalapani in northwestern Nepal, where Indian security forces have been stationed since the 1962 war between India and China , the border problem, the problem of inundation in Nepalese territory caused by embankments built on the Indian side, the dry port and the problem of terrorism had been put forth clearly. Stating that India had a positive approach on the terrorist problem, Prime Minister Deuba said he was assured that there will be full cooperation from India on stopping smuggling of weapons and explosives and terrorists entering Nepal from India via the Nepal-India border or entering India after coming from elsewhere. In response to a question as to how the talks with the Indian prime minister went, Deuba said the attitude of Indian Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee was very positive towards Nepal and he assured all possible help for Nepal.

On June 24, 2002, India's charge d'affaires in Kathmandu has said New Delhi is committed to helping the Nepalese government fight the Maoist insurgency in its country. The Indian diplomat said that special forces had been deployed along the two countries' Nepal border to stop Maoists taking refuge in India, but greater sharing of intelligence and an agreement on mutual legal assistance would tighten the border even more. The charge d'affaires also said India was working on the implementation of several economic agreements signed with Nepal.

India's External Affairs Minister Natwar Singh returned to India on June 6, 2004, from a two-day trip to Katmandu, the first foreign visit after he assumed the post as foreign minister of India just 12 days ago. Local reports said Singh's visit to Nepal ended in major diplomatic gains for India and could contribute to stability in the Himalayan kingdom. "Mr. Sing's visit is expected to boost cooperation between the two countries in combating terrorism. In addition to an already ongoing defense cooperation, Mr. Singh said New Delhi would extend further help if needed. Many believe that choosing Nepal as Singh's first foreign trip signifies the importance India attaches to its relations to a landlocked neighbor country. The visit is an indication of the importance that New Delhi attaches to good relations with Nepal, a Western diplomat said. During the visit, Singh met with King Gyanendra, Prime Minister Sher Bahadur Deuba, opposition leaders Madhav Kumar Nepal and Girija Prasad Koirala, head of the Nepali Congress among others. After his meeting with Nepalese Army chief, General Pyare Jung Thapa Saturday, Singh said authorities in both nations concur that the anti-government rebels posed a common threat since they were causing trouble not only in Nepal but in the east Indian states of Bihar, Orissa, Jharkhand and Andhra Pradesh in south east India'. Meanwhile, it is no more a secret that India is deeply concerned about the unstable politics in neighboring Nepal and more importantly the trouble created by the rebels who are fighting for an independent state. India is providing military hardware to Nepal to fight the rebels, who have close links with rebels operating in India's east and south. When asked if India's interest in Nepal was because of China, Indian ambassador to Nepal Shyam Saran replied: "China and Nepal, as far as we know, have very good relations. India itself is improving its relations with China. India has also suggested to Nepal that we could have a transit route through Nepal for trade with China. So I don't think that this is a zero sum game." India and Nepal share a long and open border and there were no restrictions on the movement of citizens of either nation. Millions of Indians and Nepalese live in the guest countries for generations. Therefore, it is significant that whatever happens in Nepal, it inevitably has an impact on India, and similarly whatever happens in India has in impact on Nepal.

India stopped all military assistance to Nepal after its King Gyanendra dismissed the government of Prime Minister Sher Bahadur Deuba, officials confirmed on February 23, 2005. Gyanendra dismissed the Nepal government on February 1, 2005, assumed direct executive powers, declared a state of emergency and suspended several fundamental rights. "The issue of military supplies to Nepal has been under continuous review taking into account the evolving situation in that country," the spokesperson for India's external affairs ministry said. "In view of the current disturbed conditions in Nepal, it is a fact that no military supplies have been delivered since February 1," he said. The previous week, India and Britain called for an immediate restoration of democracy in Nepal, during a visit to India by British Foreign Secretary Jack Straw. After the king's coup, the United States, Britain and India recalled their envoys. The Indian ambassador to Nepal, Shiv Shankar Mukherjee, returned to Kathmandu after consultations with the Indian government the previous week with a message that the king must reverse his proclamation, free all political prisoners and remove media censorship, the Hindustan Times newspaper reported. India has earlier trained soldiers of the Royal Nepal Army and supplied the Himalayan nation with sensors, firearms and helicopters. India also called off a meeting of the Indo-Nepal joint security group scheduled for the end of February, during which officials were to work out additional military and security arrangements to tackle Nepal's Maoist insurgency, the Hindustan Times reported.

The eastern parts of Nepal began facing a severe oil shortage after Indian authorities blocked the transport of oil from the Indian state of Bihar, a newspaper report said on March 25, 2005. The English language Kathmandu Post reported the shortage began after the Indian authorities held up the Nepalese oil tankers over the past few days. According to Nepal Oil Corporation officials based in the eastern Nepalese town of Biratnagar, the shortage of petroleum products in the region would be met by bringing oil in from the central town of Birgunj. The newspaper reported the Indian central government ordered its officials not to permit the Nepali oil tankers to ferry the petroleum products from Bihar's Brauni oil depot. The newspaper quoted government officials in Biratnagar as saying the chief of Bihar's Road and Tax Department disclosed this to a Nepalese delegation. The delegation went to Bihar last week in a bid to release the blocked oil and ensure a smooth flow of petroleum products to Nepal. Nepal buys crude oil in the international market and delivers it to India at ports in the eastern or western Indian coasts. In return, India supplies refined petroleum products from its depots along the Nepal-India border after charging transport and refining costs. Six Indian states-Himalachal Pradesh, Uattaranchal, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal and Sikkim-border Nepal. Short of actual military intervention, blockading is considered by many the most powerful means available to India to bring Nepal to its knees. India resorted to similar tactics in February 1989 following Nepal's arms purchase from China and in 1974, after Nepal opposed India's annexation of Sikkim.

On July 4, 2006, the Nepalese Prime Minister Girija Prasad Koirala says that India has shown goodwill and support to the seven-party government formed after the success of the historic popular movement. Informing the House about his India visit, he said that the visit has strengthened the centuries-old ties with India. The Nepalese delegation asked the Indian prime minister about India's support for Nepal's proposal to become a [temporary] member of the United Nations Security Council. He said, in front of his ministers, that India would support Nepal's bid and would ask other nations to do so as well. Hence, I have a feeling that the membership sought by Nepal for a long time might be realized this time around. We are entering a new age with the goodwill of India, our neighbors and the international community. Let us all resolve the Maoist issue and move towards a new Nepal. Koirala said that India would back Neal's efforts to resolve the armed conflict, bring about peace and stability and initiate reconstruction efforts. Similarly, Finance Minister Ram Sharan Mahat told the Parliament that India had agreed to provide 11.245 billion rupees as loans and grants to Nepal. Mahat said that India expressed its goodwill and magnanimity in Nepal's development efforts. He said that the government was working to fulfill the issues of goodwill and run physical infrastructure and employment projects. He said that India had agreed to finalize the issue of obstacles imposed on Nepalese airlines in India through technical meetings. Mahat said that India had taken positively a proposal by Nepal to allow money transfer facilities for financial institutions endorsed by the Nepal Rastra bank [central bank] and that it would be finalized soon. Minister Mahat said that hundreds of thousands of Nepalese workers in India would benefit from the opening of money transfer facilities in India. 

PS-SOURCES: New York Times January 10, 1971, August 20, 1973, June 22, 1989, Xinhua July 18, 1977, March 4, 1978, March 19, 1978, July 24, 1979, April 29, 1989, June 6, 2004, BBC January 26, 1979, March 23, 2002, June 24, 2002, July 4, 2006, Inter-Press Service April 5, 1988, Associated Press June 20, 1990, AFX Asia January 2, 2001, Deutsche Presse-Agentur February 12, 1996, July 1, 1997, July 8, 1997, August 1, 2000, February 23, 2005, March 25, 2005, The Statesman December 6, 1998

MARITIME-MIDS:

MARITIME-DISPUTE:

Discussion:

SOURCES: Gibler, D.M. 2018. Militarized Interstate Dispute Narratives, 1816-2010. Langham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. 

Gibler, D. M., S. V. Miller, and E. K. Little. 2016. "An Analysis of the Militarized Interstate Dispute (MID) Dataset, 1816-2001." International Studies Quarterly. 60 (4): 719-730.

Huth, Paul K., and Todd L. Allee. 2002. The Democratic Peace and Territorial Conflict in the Twentieth Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
